PRINTED PAGE 41
As a further protection the louvers are set between two 6 mm.
flanged steel bars, projecting 8¾ inches above the top surface of the
hull, on each side of the louver.
TO REMOVE LOUVERS
To remove the louvers, pass a rope sling beneath the blades so as
to sustain them, then release the set screws on the end which jam the
assembly together. This will allow the entire unit to drop apart.
In shipping the Mark VIII tank the sponsons are swung inboard
and the observation tower lowered flush with the top of the main
turret.

PRINTED PAGE 42
TO REMOVE SPONSONS
To remove the sponsons, take out the pins from the hinges upon
which the sponsons swing inboard; then remove the bolts from the
rear of the sponsons which bolt them against the shell plating. The
6-pounder guns should be removed from the sponsons (see p. 174),
as well as all other parts stored therein, before pulling the hinge pins
or removing the bolts. This should not be attempted without a
chain fall.
TO REPLACE SPONSONS
To assemble the sponson in place it should be lifted into its with-
drawn position by means of a chain fall or some other means and the
hinge pins then slipped into place. The nuts are placed on the hinge
pins and the sponson then swung into the outboard position, when
the bolts holding it to the shell plating can be fitted. If it is desired
to fully assemble the sponson the guns can be placed inboard before
the sponsons are fitted. If good lifting devices are handy the entire
unit can be assembled before it is lifted into position.
TO OPEN BULKHEAD DOOR
The bulkhead center door slides upward and downward in grooves
and can be held up by a hook on the bulkhead just over the opening,
the hook engaging in the handle of the door. The two side doors are
carried by two rollers, each running on a track over the doors, the
lower end being guided by a groove in the lower bulkhead plate.
The door is locked in the closed position by a lock catch engaging
against the bulkhead. The lock hand has a spring which keeps the
catch clear of the bulkhead when the door is open. To lock, push
the lock handle in, depressing the spring and turn the handle toward
the center of the bulkhead until the handle is locked.
MOUNTED ON BULKHEAD
The following parts are mounted on the bulkhead, between the
engine room and the fighting compartment:
The machine-gun ammunition racks at the top.
First-aid carrier at one end of the rack on the starboard side of the
bulkhead.
Machine-gun repair kit at the front end of the bulkhead.
Instrument board directly under the machine-gun rack, which
carries the oil gauge, three gasoline or petrol tank gauges, gasoline
gauge for auxiliary tank, tachometer, and yardometer.
To the right of the instrument board there is a pressure and a hand
pump, for supplying initial pressure to the gasoline or petrol tanks
and at the center near the floor is the starting crank. There are two
doors through the bulkhead, one on each side, leading into the engine
compartment.

PRINTED PAGE 43
OPENINGS IN HULL
The following is a list of the openings in the hull assembly:
Main turret, rear.—Machine-gun post, with pistol hole on right,
3½ by 2½ inches, peephole on left, 1 by 4¼ inches.
Main turret, port side.—Starting from rear and working forward.
Peephole, machine-gun hole, pistol hole, peephole, 16.812 by 15.812
door, pistol hole.
Main turret, starboard.—Starting from rear and working forward.
Peephole, pistol hole, machine-gun hole, peephole, 16.812 by 15.812
door, pistol hole.
Main turret, front.—Machine-gun hole on each wing, peephole in
center.
Main turret, top.—Rear end double doors, opening upward, each
21½ by 8⅞ inches.
Observers’ turret.—Peephole on each of the four sides, and two peep-
holes in the roof.
Drive turret.—Peephole in both port and starboard side, outward
opening in flap in front, with peephole in center, periscope hole in top.
Main hull door openings.—Behind sponson, and to the center of
hull, door on each side 29⅞ by 59⅞ inches, machine-gun hole in
each door, and pistol hole in each door.
Sponsons.—Peephole in backplate on the starboard side, one pistol
hole.

PRINTED PAGE 45
ENGINE AND ENGINE SYSTEMS
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The engine is mounted longitudinally within the hull of the machine
at the rear end. It is contained within the engine compartment,
inclosed by the two side walls of the hull, the floor, the upper plating
of the hull and the transverse bulkhead which separates the engine
compartment from the fighting compartment. It is a 12-cylinder
Liberty type, with singly cast cylinders and an overhead valve
action. The action is a V design, having six cylinders on each side,
and an independent cam shaft for each set of six cylinders. The
cam shaft is overhead, and each cam shaft operates directly on the
overhead rockers by means of roller followers. The valves open
downward into the cylinders. Each cam shaft has 24 cams, and
each is driven by a set of bevel gears from the cam shaft.

PRINTED PAGE 46
The engine group includes the engine itself, a governor, water
pump, Delco ignition system, Ball carburetor, and the cooling system,
which includes a radiator, Sirocco fan blower, and the necessary
driving units.
PREPARING ENGINE FOR SERVICE
While every possible precaution is taken at the factory to insure
Liberty engines being properly assembled, the human element,
which is not infallible, must always be considered; therefore:
1. Inspect all visible bolts and nuts and see that they are properly
drawn up and securely locked.
2. Inspect throttle and spark controls and see that throttles of
both carburetor assemblies are synchronized. See that throttle
control at driver’s seat permits full throttle opening.
See that spark control at driver’s seat permits the specified range
of advance and retard at the distributor. (10 degrees after dead
center retarded and 30 degrees before dead center advanced).
3. Check tappet gap. With the cylinder set on the firing point
the gap between the inlet-valve tappets and the valve stems should
be 0.014 to 0.16 and between the exhaust-valve tappets and valve
stems should be 0.019 and 0.021.
4. Inspect all electrical connections. See that all wire terminals
are properly soldered clean and firmly attached at the distributors,
generator, battery, switch, and voltage regulator.
All wire terminal nuts should be cotter pinned or screwed down on
lock washers.
See that all wires are properly insulated and supported at close
intervals in such a manner that the insulation will not be abraded.
5. Inspect ignition system. Note whether or not the mark on the
distributor assembly base coincides with the corresponding mark on
the cam-shaft housing flange.
6. Check each breaker individually by turning engine over until
breaker is wide open and testing “gap” (width of opening) by means
of thickness gauge marked “distributor contacts” attached to dis-
tributor wrench. Gap should be 0.010 to 0.013 of an inch.
7. Check timing of one main breaker on each distributor assembly
with an eight-volt lamp and battery or with an electric torch.
8. Check synchronization of two distributor assemblies.
Clean inside of distributor covers by wiping with soft cloth moist-
ened with alcohol or gasoline; dry carefully.
9. Replace covers so that terminal marker 1 L is just to the left of
the red mark on the assembly bases spark retarded. With the engine
set on the firing point of No. 1 L cylinder—in other words, with the
No. 1 crank set 10 degrees past the compression dead center—the
carbon brush in the end of the distributor rotor should bear on the
brass contact marked 1 L on the distributor head.

PRINTED PAGE 47
10. Remove spark plugs and inspect carefully for defective or
broken porcelain. The electrode should be tight in the insulator and
the insulator should be properly gasketed and drawn up tightly to
prevent gas leakage. Hot gas blowing through a plug will overheat
and render it inoperative. A spark plug which has been used and has
given satisfactory service is always safer than a new plug; therefore
do not discard spark plugs simply because they have been used, unless
it is known positively that they are defective.
Note.—Defects in spark plugs will be most apparent when the
plugs are hot.
11. Check spark-plug gap should be 0.015 to 0.018 of an inch. A
gauge is provided marked “spark plug” on the distributor wrench.
12. Clean plugs; use a stiff brush and gasoline.
13. Replace plugs, being careful that gasket is in place and that
plug is drawn down tightly on it.
14. Trace out high-tension wires from the distributors and be sure
that each plug is connected to the correspondingly marked terminal
on the distributor.
Note.—Plugs on the side of the cylinders toward the flywheel are
connected to the left-hand distributor. Plugs on the opposite side of
the cylinders are connected on the right-hand distributor.
Order of firing.—Standing at the distributor end of the engine and
looking toward the flywheel, the groups of cylinders are designated as
left and right, respectively, and are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6,
beginning at the distributor end. The order of firing is as follows:
THE GASOLINE SYSTEM
15. Connect pipes, and, with gasoline shut-off cock open, inspect all
piping and connections carefully for leaks. Inspect gasoline strainer
for leaks.
Be sure that carburetor float chambers fill properly and that
carburetor does not “flood.” To determine whether or not the car-
buretor float chamber is full, unscrew the cap over the needle valve.
If the chamber is full the needle will be down on its seat and can not
be depressed further. If this needle can be pressed down it would
indicate either a stoppage in the pipe or insufficient pressure in the
tank.
16. Close gasoline shut-off cock. Caution: If temperature is 40
degrees Fahr. above zero or lower, follow “cold weather suggestions”
on page 55.
TO FILL COOLING SYSTEM
Use water which is as free from lime and other impurities as it is
possible to obtain.

PRINTED PAGE 49
17. Examine the radiator, pump, water jackets, piping, and all
connections carefully to be sure that there are no leaks in the cooling
system. (See Cooling system, p. 97.)
18. Fill engine-oiling system. Lubricating oil of the following
properties is recommended:
ENGINE-OIL SPECIFICATIONS
High specific gravity oils.—This class includes all oils having a
specific gravity above 0.9100 (or below 24° Baumé conversion by the
Tagliabue Manual, ninth edition, or below 23.85° Baumé conversion
by the Bureau of Standards’ conversion table, Circular No. 57) having
a pour test below 15° F. (Tested by the method of the American
Society for Testing Materials).
Low specific gravity oils.—This class includes all oils having a
specific gravity below 0.9100 (or above 24° Baumé conversion by the
Tagliabue Manual, ninth edition, or above 23.85° Baumé conversion
by the Bureau of Standards’ conversion table, Circular No. 57) and
having a pour test above 15° F. (Tested by the method of the
American Society for Testing Materials.)
Physical properties and tests.—The oil must be made from pure,
highly refined petroleum products, and must be suitable in every way
for the entire lubrication of stationary cylinder aircraft engines
operating under all conditions.
Viscosity.—The viscosity of the oil when tested in a Saybolt
Universal Viscosimeter at 212° F., shall be as follows:
High specific gravity oil, 70 seconds to 75 seconds.
Low specific gravity oil, 85 seconds to 90 seconds.
Pour test.—The oil must pass the following pour test:
High specific gravity oil, not over 15° F.
Low specific gravity oil, not over 40° F.
Flash point.—The oil must have a flash point over 350 degrees
Fahr. in a Cleveland open cup.
Carbon.—The oil must not show a carbon residue of over 1.5 per
cent by the Conradson method. The carbon shown must be loose
and flaky and must break up easily in the crucible.
Emulsion test.—One ounce of oil shall be placed in a standard 4-
ounce sample bottle with 1 ounce of distilled water. The mixture shall
be heated to a temperature of 180° F. and then shaken vigorously
for five minutes. After standing for one hour the oil must be clear
and of the same color as before the test. All the water must have
settled and appear only slightly cloudy.
All tests must be made in accordance with methods adopted by the
American Society for Testing Materials. Detailed descriptions of the

PRINTED PAGE 51
Conradson Carbon Test and the Pour Test have been reprinted in
Signal Corps Specifications No. 3525, which will be furnished on
application.
Physical properties and tests to be determined as follows:
Gravity: Baumé, at 60° F.
Flash: Cleveland open cup.
Fire: Cleveland open cup.
Viscosity: Saybolt Universal Viscosimeter, at 100°, 130°, and 212°F.
Pour test: American Society for Testing Materials’ method.
Carbon: Conradson method.
Color: Lovibund.
FILLING ENGINE-OIL RESERVOIR
Remove plug on side of oil-pump housing during the process of
filling the reservoir and allow it to remain out until oil flows from it.
Do not fill reservoir more than three-quarters full.
19. See that ignition switches are in “off” position and try com-
pression of each cylinder separately by cranking the engine over
slowly by means of the crank and “rocking” it up to each compres-
sion point. Any weak cylinders can readily be detected, either by
the decreased resistance to cranking or by the hissing sound due to
the leaking valve or spark plug.
Locate the weak cylinder in the following manner: Crank the
engine over again, meanwhile watching the number 6-L exhaust
valve. When this valve is wide open the piston in No. 1-L cylinder
will be coming up on its compression stroke and just before the valve
closes No. 1-L will have reached its point of highest compression or
top dead center.
Now start from this point and crank the engine slowly past each
compression period, at the same time calling off the numbers of the
cylinders in their order of firing until the weak one is reached. For
the causes of loss of compression see page 59. It sometimes happens
that an engine will show uneven compression when cold, but will be all
right at running temperature, so that it is not advisable to assume that
anything is radically wrong with it until it has been warmed up and
the compression tested again.
TO START ENGINE
Before starting a new engine, or one which has stood idle for some
length of time, it is advisable to inject a small quantity of lubricating
oil (about one-half ounce) through each priming cock. With the igni-
tion switches “off,” turn the engine over through five or six revolutions
to distribute the oil over the cylinder walls.
Set throttle just slightly open; in other words, at a point which will
run the engine at 600 to 800 r. p. m.
Set spark at fully retarded position.

PRINTED PAGE 53
The ignition system for Liberty engines is so designed as to abso-
lutely prevent the production of a spark when turned backward, nor
will the engine “kick back” if it should happen to “rock” after
cranking. However, it is essential that the spark be retarded when
cranking.
Prime engine by injecting a small quantity (fill priming cock twice)
of gasoline through each priming cock. In cold weather it will be
necessary to prime the engine a little more heavily than in warm
weather. It is better, however, to insufficiently prime it than to
prime it too heavily.
With the ignition switch still “off,” turn engine forward two revolu-
tions.
Turn one (either one) ignition switch “on,” and start engine by
means of the electric starter or hand crank.
The switch is so designed that with both switches turned “on” the
generator is connected in, which will result in a rather high rate of
discharge from the battery and possible difficulty in starting. Both
switches should be turned “on,” however, as soon as the engine is
running.
As soon as the engine is started advance the spark about one-half
way, leaving the throttle in approximately the starting position, and
allow the engine to run at idling speed (about 800 r. p. m.) for five to
ten minutes, or until it is thoroughly warmed up. At the same time
test crank case temperature with your hand. The crank case should
be warm by the time the temperature of the water has increased to
150° F.
Accelerate and slow down the engine occasionally to throw the oil
up into the cylinders.
In extremely cold weather it is possible that the cooling water
might warm up more rapidly than the lubrication oil. In this case
it would be advisable to stop the engine for a few moments in order
to allow the heat from the cylinders to travel down to the crank case.
In the meantime—
Note the oil-gauge pressure. After about three minutes running at
600 to 800 r. p. m. this should show above 5 pounds pressure, and at
1,600 r. p. m. up to 30 pounds maximum. Failure to show these
pressures may be due to dirt on the relief valve seat. The gauge
will show higher pressures when the engine is first started, and is
colder than after it has thoroughly warmed up.
Examine all oil piping for leaks.
AIR-PRESSURE GAUGE
Note air-pressure gauge.—The engine-driven air pump, with its regu-
lator, is designed to hold the pressure on the gasoline tank at approxi-
mately 3 pounds. In order to determine whether or not the pump

PRINTED PAGE 55
is functioning properly, screw down the pressure regulator adjusting
screw. This should cause the pressure in the tank to rise if the pump
is operating as it should. Now screw the regulator adjustment up
until the pressure is held steadily at 3 to 4 pounds.
Note water circulation.—Temperature gauge should show a steady
rise up to not to exceed 200° F. The most efficient temperature
will vary with weather conditions, but will average 180° F.
Note ammeter reading.—At idling speeds the ammeter needle will
stand on the “discharge” side of zero. At about 650 r. p. m., with
both switches “on,” the needle will stand at zero, and at high speeds
it should stand on the “charge” side of zero.
When the engine is well warmed up the throttle may be opened
partially (neutral gears) and the speed of the engine noted. Tacho-
meter should show not over 1,350 to 1,400 r. p. m.
Operation of each ignition head should be tested separately by
shutting off first one switch and then the other. The engine should
show the same r. p. m. in each case. With the throttle wide open,
whether the engine is running on one or both sets will make very
little difference in the speed (possible 10 or 15 r. p. m.). At lower
speeds (600 to 800 r. p. m.) the effect will be more apparent.
Before stopping the engine, throttle it down to idling speed for a
minute ot two, then turn the ignition switches to “off,” and at the
same time open the throttle wide. Opening the throttle will “choke”
the engine and cause it to stop immediately. Allowing the throttle
to remain in the idling position may permit an overheated plug or
particle of carbon to fire the engine spasmodically for some time after
the ignition is cut off.
Caution.—Do not attempt to crank an engine immediately after
it has been stopped. An overheated plug or incandescent particle
of carbon might cause preignition and a disastrous back kick. Allow
it to cool off for a few minutes.
COLD-WEATHER SUGGESTIONS
1. Inspect the engine carefully, as instructed on pages 57 to 65.
2. Put 3 gallons of hot lubricating oil into the engine crank case.
Oil should be heated in an open-top container set into boiling water.
3. Put a sufficient quantity of hot oil into the oil reservoir, so that
the reservoir will be about two-thirds full after the 3 gallons placed
in the crank case have been pumped back into it.
4. Remove the vent plug in the side of the oil-pump body so that
the hot oil may run in to prime the pump.
5. Fill the cooling system with boiling water. Soft water should
be used wherever available. Do not use any antifreeze preparation.
6. Prime the engine and start at slow speed with the throttle par-
tially closed.

PRINTED PAGE 57
7. Accelerate and slow down the engine occasionally to throw the
oil up into the cylinder. Run the engine until the oil has been thor-
oughly distributed as indicated by the action of the oil-pressure
gauge and a uniform temperature of the engine. This period need
not be continuous, and, if possible, engines should be alternately run
for a few minutes, stopped for five minutes, and then restarted.
8. If the machine is not run at once the engine should not be
allowed to remain stationary for more than 10 minutes at a time, as
it will get cold again.
TO DRAIN ENGINE
9. After finishing a test or run, drain all oil and water before the
engine has had an opportunity to cool off. Plug No. 250 and sump
cover No. 8129 should be removed to drain the oil from the engine.
A plug of the same number (No. 250) is provided in the bottom of the
water pump for the purpose of draining the water.
10. Spark plugs should be removed from the engine and kept in a
warm place if the engine is to stand idle overnight or for any con-
siderable period.
ENGINE TROUBLES
The diagnosing of gasoline-engine troubles is largely a matter of
experience on account of the fact that a symptom may be due to any
one of a number of causes. A correct conclusion can only be arrived
at by a process of elimination. The different causes, as set forth in
the table which follows, have been arranged in the order in which
they most frequently occur.
Try one thing at a time and in the order given in the table. Once
the trouble is located the remedy should be obvious. It is essential
that any troubles be remedied immediately when they are located;
otherwise serious damage or the entire failure of the engine may
result.
If the engine can not be turned over under reasonable pressure:
1. Examine water pump for ice.
2. Examine gears for obstruction.
If engine fails to start, it may be due to any one of the following
causes:
1. Lack of gasoline.
Examine tank.
Examine shut-off cock.
Examine trap.
Examine piping.
Examine hose connections.
Examine carburetor float valve.
2. Primed too heavily.
3. Insufficiently primed.

PRINTED PAGE 59
4. Throttle too wide open.
5. Throttle not opened wide enough.
6. Water in carburetor.
7. Battery not up to full strength.
8. Loose connection at battery, switch, distributor.
9. Broken wire.
10. Dirt or moisture on outside or inside of distributor.
11. Wires improperly connected.
12. Ignition incorrectly timed.
13. Air leak in intake manifold.
14. Valves improperly timed.
If engine stops:
1, 6, 8, 9, 10 above.
1. Throttle control loosened up or disconnected.
2. Overheated.
If engine misses:
1. Loss of compression.
Valve sticking.
Valve seat caked with carbon.
Tappet improperly adjusted.
Valve warped.
Valve spring broken.
Cylinder or piston scored.
Rings broken or sticking.
2. Spark plug loose or defective.
3. Rocker arm too tight.
4. High-tension insulation defective.
5. Moisture or dirt in distributor.
6. Water or dirt in carburetor; examine jets.
If engine fails to develop power:
1. Insufficient throttle opening.
2. Insufficient spark advance.
3. Insufficient gasoline supply.
Piping or stop-cock capacity too small.
Obstruction in piping.
Obstruction in trap.
Pressure leak.
Insufficient pressure—if pressure-feed system.
Obstruction in one or more jets.
4. Improper carburetor adjustment. (See carburetor.)
5. One or more cylinders missing fire. (See above.)
6. Engine overheated. (See below.)
7. Air leaks—intake manifold.
8. Obstruction in carburetor intake.
9. Water in gasoline.
