PRINTED PAGE 101
In assembling this unit, the bevel driver should be laid in the hous-
ing with the gear with the widest face at the cupped or recessed end of
the housing. The two halves of the housing must be properly put
together also.
TO ASSEMBLE THE ENGINE
CRANK CASE, UPPER HALF
1. Place the upper half of the crank case in the inspecting stand
bottom side up.
2. Wipe out all bearings carefully.
CRANK SHAFT
3. Oil all bushings with fresh, clean oil and lay the crank shaft
with its thrust bearing in place. Be sure that the thrust bearing is
properly seated in the case and that the sleeves do not permit end
play.
Note.—The thrust bearing sleeves are made in different thick-
nesses, No. 12252 being the thick one and No. 12238 the thin one. A
combination of these sleeves may be obtained, which will insure the
proper fit in the case.
CONNECTING RODS
4. The connecting rods may now be assembled on the crank shaft.
The rods are numbered on the web at the piston end, 1, 2, 3, etc., in-
dicating their location on the crank shaft beginning at the gear end.
The side of the rods on which the numbers are stamped should be
toward the gear end of the shaft.
All forked rods should be so fitted that they will be on the right-
hand side of the engine looking from the gear end toward the pro-
peller end when the engine is right side up. Crank pins should be
liberally oiled before the rods are put in place, as should also the out-
side of the connecting rod bushings before the plain end rods are as-
sembled. The hollow crank pins and main bearings should be filled
with clean oil.
Draw up all connecting rod bolts snugly and cotter-pin them.
Note.—The cotter pins in the bolts through the forked end rod
should be inserted so that the heads will be on the inside or toward
the plain end rod. Otherwise the bent-over ends of the cotter pins
will interfere with the plain end rod.
Be sure that none of these bolts are overlooked.
CRANK CASE, LOWER HALF
The lower half of the crank case may now be put in place.
5. Put the washers No. 115 and nuts No. 105 on the front and
rear bearing bolts and draw them tight.

PRINTED PAGE 102
WATER-PUMP BEVEL DRIVER
6. Put the water-pump bevel driver with its bushing in place and
fasten with the lock screw No. 174. Test the backlash of the water-
pump bevel driver gear and the crank-shaft gear.
This should be 0.005 inch minimum and 0.010 inch maximum.
If these gears mesh too tightly, shims No. 8502, 0.002 inch thick,
may be placed between the crank-shaft gear and the crank-shaft
flange in sufficient number to produce the proper backlash.
7. Now turn the whole assembly right side up and complete the
installation of the bearing-bolt washers No. 115 and nuts No. 105.
Draw up these nuts snugly and cotter-pin them.
8. Install bolts No. 116 and tighten and cotter-pin them.
PISTONS
9. Proceed to fit the pistons on their proper rods. Remember
that the pistons are marked right and left and numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6, and that the pistons should be so placed on the rods that the
numbers are toward the gear end of the engine.
The piston pins should be oiled before being pressed into place.
10. Insert the piston-pin retainers No. 12547. These should be a
light tapping fit in the piston bosses.
CYLINDERS
11. Oil the inside walls of the cylinders and the outside of the pis-
tons. The cylinders are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., and are marked
right and left, indicating their position on the crank case. These
marks will be found on the edge of the base flange near the water
inlet. Be sure that the gasket No. 12346 is in place on the crank-
case studs. The crank should be turned over so that the piston on
which the cylinder is being placed is at the top of its stroke.
The rings should be compressed in the grooves as the cylinder is
slipped down over them.
12. Push the cylinder carefully down into place, put on the nuts
No. 103 and run them down on the studs, but do not tighten them.
13. After all the cylinders are in place put on the gaskets No. 8175
and the intake headers No. 12045.
Caution.—Insert loose-fitting wooden plugs in spark-plug holes to
prevent any small parts from falling into cylinders.
INTAKE HEADERS
14. Now put on the intake-head stud washers No. 113 and the
intake-header nuts No. 103. The intake-header nuts and the
cylinder to crank-case nuts on each set of three cylinders should all
be tightened up at the same time; i. e., each nut should be drawn
down one after another about one-fourth turn at a time until all are
tight with an equal tension.

PRINTED PAGE 103
15. The special nuts No. 8234 may now be put in place and tight-
ened up with a special long-shanked socket wrench.
16. Tighten all nuts and properly cotter-pin them.
17. Put the gaskets No. 8172 between the intake header and the
water-inlet elbows No. 8173 and tighten these up with the cap
screws No. 201. The gaskets No. 8172 should be soaked in water
before putting them in place. Leave three screws No. 201 on each
side (one at each end of the engine and one about midway between
these two) loose until the cable tube has been installed.
OUTLET HEADERS
18. Put the water-outlet header gaskets No. 8153 in place and bolt
on the front and rear water outlets No. 12402 and 12401, respectively.
Before these water outlets are bolted down the extension tube No.
12363 and the two pieces of hose No. 12128 should be slipped in
place.
19. Now fasten down the water outlets with nuts No. 101 and
cotter-pin them.
20. Slip the carburetor to intake-header bolts No. 8398–No. 8399
in place.
CARBURETORS
21. Attach the two carburetors. Be sure that the unions No.
12367 and gaskets No. 182 are in place. With respect to these gas-
kets it is advisable to fit new ones after an engine has been over-
hauled.
Care should be taken that the carburetors are mounted in their
proper position on the engine (propeller end and gear end) and that
the air intake scoops open toward the propeller end.
THROTTLES
22. The carburetor throttle coupling shaft No. 12498 may now be
put in place and the two sets of throttles synchronized as follows:
Screw out the throttle stop screw on each carburetor until it clears
the gear sector when the throttles are entirely closed. Slack off the
adjusting screws No. 13416 until the lever No. 12498 clears each one
of them by approximately 1/16 inch.
Now entirely close the throttles on both carburetors and holding
them firmly in a closed position screw up the adjusting screws No.
13416 until they just touch each side of the lever No. 12498 and lock
the screws by means of a wire through the head of each. Connect
up the altitude adjustment coupling rod in such a manner that both
altitude adjustments will get the full throw in each direction.
TIMING ENGINE
A part of the equipment of every Liberty engine is a timing disk,
so designed that it may be mounted on the flywheel as a permanent

PRINTED PAGE 104
fixture or used only in the hangar or repair shop as a means of check-
ing the setting of valves and distributors. To use this timing disk,
proceed as follows:
1. If the timing disk is not already mounted on the flywheel in-
stall it in such a manner that the dowel in the propeller-hub flange
enters the dowel hole in the disk. It may be clamped in this position
by means of two bolts through the propeller-hub bolt holes.
2. Remove the spark plug from the flywheel of No. 6 L cylinder.
3. Insert a pencil or scale through the spark-plug hole and turn the
engine over until the piston on its upstroke touches the pencil and
causes it to ride up. Continue to turn the engine over slowly until
the piston as indicated by the travel of the pencil stops moving
upward and is just about to start down. This will be approximately
the top dead center.
4. Allow the crank shaft to remain in this position temporarily and
clamp the timing pointers, which will be found in the tool kit under
the special cylinder base flange nuts No. 8234, so that the pointers
extend over the edge of the timing disk.
5. With the end of the pencil resting on the top of the piston make
a mark with a knife blade about one-half inch above the edge of the
spark-plug hole.
6. Turn the engine over in a forward direction until the pencil
has moved down so that the mark is even with the top edge of the
hole, and with a piece of chalk or a pencil mark the disk in line with
one of the pointers.
7. Turn the engine backward until the pencil has moved up and
down to the point where the mark is again even with the top of the
spark-plug hole, and mark the disk in line with the pointer.
8. With a pair of dividers find the point midway between the two
marks on the disk. This point will indicate the exact dead center
of No. 1 and No. 6 cranks and should be marked with chalk or pencil.
9. Turn the engine over until this dead-center mark is in line
with the pointer. Allow the crank shaft to remain in this position;
and
10. Reset the pointers so that they come in line with the dead-
center marks stamped on the disk.
11. Turn the engine over in the direction of rotation through 10°
as indicated by the scale on the disk.
NEUTRAL POINT
The crank shaft is now set on the neutral point of No. 6 left cylinder
and the firing point-spark retarded of No. 1 left cylinder. Reference
to the timing instructions will explain what is meant by “neutral
point.” It is the point 10° past the top dead center which marks
the beginning and end of the cycle of operations. The exhaust valve
closes and the inlet valve opens at this point.

PRINTED PAGE 105
Mount the generator drive-shaft assembly No. 8210, being careful
that the gasket No. 8347 is in place and a sufficient number of shims
No. 8511 (0.002 inch thick) to insure proper mesh of the generator
drive-shaft lower gear with the crank-shaft gear. These gears
should have a minimum back lash of 0.005 inch and a maximum of
0.010 inch.
Mount the two cam-shaft drive shafts No. 8208, meshing the
gears in such a manner that the mark on the splined coupling is “fore
and aft” or parallel with the center line of the engine.
Now mount the cam-shaft housing assemblies.
If it was not found necessary to replace either the cam shaft or
gear, be sure that the marked teeth on both gear and pinion are in
line. This should bring the mark on the splined end of the drive
shaft “fore and aft.”
The assemblies may now be set in place with the splined coupling
marks in line.
Note.—All marks for both right and left cylinders are located
with No. 1–6 cranks 10° past left dead center.
Complete the installation of these assemblies by replacing the
washers No. 112 and the nuts No. 102 and properly cotter pinning
them.
Slip the felt washers No. 8068 into place and tighten up the stuffing
boxes No. 8066.
TAPPET GAP AND FIRING POINT
Test the gap between all tappets and the valves which they operate.
The tappet gap for each cylinder should be checked when that cylinder
is on the firing point. The firing point of No. 1 cylinder is the
neutral point of No. 6 on the same side. The firing point of No. 2 is
the neutral point of No. 5. The firing point of No. 3 is the neutral
point of No. 4. The firing point of No. 4 is the neutral point of
No. 3. The firing point of No. 5 is the neutral point of No. 2. The
firing point of No. 6 is the neutral point of No. 1. It will be noticed
that the sum of the numbers of these pair of cylinders is always
seven. For example: to find the firing point of No. 4 cylinder, turn
the engine over, meanwhile watching the No. 3 exhaust valve.
When this valve has just closed and before No. 3 inlet valve has
opened, the neutral point of No. 3 cylinder will have been reached.
This will be the firing point of No. 4. With the engine cold the
clearance between the inlet valve tappets and the valve stems should
be 0.014 to 0.016. The clearance between the exhaust valve tappets
and valve stems should be 0.019 to 0.021. This clearance should be
adjusted by adding or taking out shims under the tappet head.
These shims are made in varying thicknesses; the thick shim No. 8089
being 0.015 inch thick, the medium shim No. 8086 being 0.008 inch,
and the thin shim No. 8087 being 0.003 inch. The combination of

PRINTED PAGE 106
these shims will permit of a very accurate adjustment of the gap.
Be sure that the shims are properly placed and that the nuts on the
tappets are tightly drawn up and cottered.
If it was found necessary to replace either the cam shaft or the cam-
shaft gear, the gear should have been left unmounted as instructed.
In this case proceed as follows:
1. With No. 1–6 crank set 10° past the left dead center, the
marked splines on the cam-shaft drive shaft set “fore and aft,” the
marked splines on the upper cam-shaft drive shaft in line with them,
the marked tooth on the upper cam-shaft drive shaft gear should be
toward the observer and on the center line of the cylinders.
2. Without moving any of this assembly rotate the left cam shaft
in a clockwise direction until the No. 6 exhaust valve is just closed
and the inlet valve is just about to open.
3. Now mesh the cam-shaft gear in such a manner that the teeth
and the flange bolt holes will line up perfectly.
The cam-shaft gear has 48 teeth and is bolted to the flange by
means of seven bolts. This will permit an adjustment of one-seventh
of one tooth space or 2 1/7° of crank-shaft travel.
4. Tighten up two of the cam-shaft gear bolts and check the tapped
clearance on all left cylinders.
TO ADVANCE OR RETARD VALVE SETTING
5. Now check the opening and closing of the exhaust and inlet
valves as shown on the timing diagram. If it is found that the valves
are late in opening and closing, the number of degrees should be noted
and the cam-shaft gear moved one or more holes in the direction of
rotation without moving the cam-shaft drive shaft or the cam shaft.
Remember that for each hole moved forward the cam shaft is ad-
vanced 2 1/7° of crank-shaft rotation. If the valves are found to
open early, set the cam-shaft gear backward one or more holes.
Always check valve timing by turning engine in forward direction
of rotation so as to take up all backlash in gears and lost motion
in couplings.
After the gear has been properly located, set the left distributor
driving flange over the bolts in such a position that the marked notch
is in line with the marked tooth on the drive pinion.
Now tighten up and cotter pin the bolts and mark the gear in line
with marked tooth on the drive pinion.
To set the right cam shaft, turn the engine over in the direction of
rotation through 45° or until the No. 1 crank is 10° past the right
dead center. With the crank shaft in this position turn the cam
shaft over in a clockwise direction until the No. 1 exhaust valve is just
closed and the inlet valve is just about to open. Locate the gear in
the same manner as in setting the left cam shaft.

PRINTED PAGE 107
Before mounting the right distributor driving flange, turn the crank
shaft back through 45° or to its original position and set the dis-
tributor drive flange so that the marked notch comes in line with the
marked tooth on the drive pinion, or, in other words, in line with the
center line of the right cylinders.
Now tighten up the cam-shaft gear bolts and cotter pin as before.
TIMING IGNITION
Set the two distributor assemblies in place, being careful to get
them on the proper housings right and left.
These distributors are marked R and L on the outside surface of the
spark-control arms. They should be fastened temporarily by means
of two bolts No. 116 each in such a position that the notch on the
distributor base flange coincides with the notch on the cam-shaft
housing flange.
If it has been found necessary to replace either the cam-shaft
housing or the distributor head, and the new parts do not carry these
identifying notches, the distributor should be so set that with the
spark retarded the center line of the cylinders will be midway between
1 L and 6 R terminals.
1. Set the engine on the firing point, spark retarded, No. 1 L
cylinder; in other words, the neutral point of No. 6 L. Reference to
the timing diagram shows that this is 10° past the top dead center.
SYNCHRONIZING BREAKERS
It is assumed that the contact separation or gap was properly
adjusted (0.010 to 0.013 inch) at the time the distributor heads were
overhauled. The synchronization of the two main breakers on each
distributor may be checked by inserting a card between the contact
points of one breaker and noting the timing of the other. Then
repeating the procedure on the other breaker. If the two main
breakers on a distributor do not open within 1½° of each other, they
may be synchronized in the following manner: Remove the cotter pin
and loosen nut on the bracket, which will allow the complete breaker-
arm bracket assembly to be shifted around the stud as a center.
This will vary the setting of the contact separation or gap, which
should be brought back to the proper limits and the breaker arms
tried again for time of opening. By shifting the breaker-arm bracket
assembly and each time bringing the opening of the contact points
back to the proper limits, a point can be reached where the two
parallel breaker arms will open at exactly the same time, which is the
proper setting for these arms. The auxiliary breaker arm must open
before the parallel breaker arms when the cam is being rotated in a
clockwise direction, as previously explained. If this breaker arm is
not adjusted so that it will open in the above manner, it will not

PRINTED PAGE 108
prevent the back firing of the engine when being rocked on com-
pression preparatory to starting. After the distributor breaker-arm
bracket assembly has been shifted to such a position so as to give the
proper opening of the parallel breaker arms, nut Q should be screwed
down tight and locked in place by cotter pin P. The countact screws
should be adjusted to line up and meet squarely with the contact
points in the breaker arms when the contact points are closed. This
can be accomplished by slightly bending and twisting the brackets
which hold the contact screws.
2. Swing the timing lever on the distributor to the full retarded
position or as far in a clockwise direction as is possible.
3. Loosen the bolts No. 116 sufficiently that the distributor base
flange can be rotated on the slotted holes.
4. Connect battery and electric light across the distributor termi-
nals as shown on Plate 66, and rotate the distributor base flange in
a counterclockwise direction until the light just goes out.
Tighten the bolts with the distributor in this position and com-
plete the installation of the bolts No. 116.
5. Without changing the position of the crank shaft install and
set the right-hand distributor in a similar manner.

PRINTED PAGE 109
6. The accuracy of the timing should now be checked up by
rotating the crank shaft backward 15° or 20°; then forward very
slowly, meanwhile watching the electric lights. They should both
go out at the same time within a limit of 1½° on the timing disk.
If the pocket flashlight is used instead of the two electric lights and
battery, each distributor head will have to be checked separately
and the time of the break noted according to the timing disk.
7. Install the cross reach No. 8333 and adjust it so that both dis-
tributor heads will be fully retarded. Check the synchronization of
the two distributor heads with spark lever in advanced position also.
8. Install the high-tension cable tube and cable assembly, fasten-
ing it by means of the screws No. 201 to the intake headers.
9. Wire the heads of all these screws so that they will not loosen up.
Caution.—Care should be exercised in placing the distributor head
assembly on the distributor to keep from breaking the rotor brush.
It can best be done by putting the distributor-head assembly over
the two studs upon which it is mounted and slightly rocking it back
and forth with the rotor in the right-angle position to the center
line of the two studs. This will gradually work the brush back into
the rotor and allow the distributor head to slip down into place.
Remove wooden plugs from the spark-plug holes and install spark
plugs. Connect the high-tension wires to them and to the distribu-
tors, being careful that each plug is connected to the proper terminal.
Remember that plugs on the side of the cylinders toward the propeller
are connected to the left-hand distributor and those on the side of
the cylinders toward the gear end of the engine are connected to the
right-hand distributor.
Install the water-pump assembly, being careful to see that the
gasket No. 8345 is in place. Try the mesh of the water-pump gear
with the water-pump bevel drive gear. This should be 0.005 inch
minimum and 0.010 inch maximum. If these gears mesh too tightly,
shims No. 8510 may be inserted between the bearing retainer No.
8345 and the gasket in sufficient number to produce the proper
back lash.
WATER-INLET MANIFOLDS
Install the water-inlet manifolds No. 12123, replacing the hose con-
nections and clamps wherever the original ones were found to be
defective.
Put on the inlet manifold extensions No. 12096 and No. 12097 with
their hose connections.
In tightening up hose clamps be careful that the clamp is bent so as
to fit snugly around the hose and bear against it at all points. Do
not draw up the clamps so tightly that the clamp cuts into the rubber.

PRINTED PAGE 110
It is advisable before installing the engine in the tank to tape these
hose connections with a good rubber friction tape and shellac them,
putting clamps on over the shellacked tape. The shellacked tape will
protect the hose from oil and gasoline.
OIL-PUMP ASSEMBLY
Install the oil-pump assembly. See that the gasket No. 8348 is in
good condition and is so placed that the gasket does not overlap the
oil passages either in the oil pump housing or the crank case.
Install the nuts No. 101 and tighten them up evenly and cotter-pin
them.
CRANK-CASE BREATHERS
Install the crank-case breather. See that the gasket No. 8172 is in
place and fasten with nuts No. 101.
Install the crank-case oil fillers No. 8156 with gaskets No. 8158 and
fasten in place with nuts No. 101.
Install crank-case sump cover No. 8129. Be sure that the lock No.
8130 is in its proper place.
The whole engine should now be given a careful final inspection.
Make sure that all bolts have been properly drawn up and locked
either by means of cotter pins or lock wires.
GOVERNOR
The governor is mounted on the front end of the engine, and oper-
ates on the carburetor throttle. It is designed to hold the speed of
the engine below 1,400 r. p. m. A part sectional view of the governor
is shown on page 111. Its method of operation is as follows:
The shaft (No. 1) rotates with the crank shaft of the engine,
carrying with it the sleeve (No. 2) and the balls (No. 3). As the
speed of the shaft increases the balls (No. 3) tend to fly from the
center, due to the centrifugal force, moving the collar (No. 4) along
the shaft and imparting a motion to the linkage (No. 5) which is
connected to the carburetor throttle. The spring (No. 6) is so
designed as to provide a preliminary resistance against the action of
the governor, permitting the engine to reach its designed speed
before the governor comes into action.
TO REMOVE ENGINE
To remove the engine all the electric wires should be disconnected
as well as the feed pipes and manifold connections. Disconnect the
fan drive and generator drive and the connections with the cardan
shaft. The plates holding the engine to its foundation should then
be removed, and the engine can be lifted through the top of the hull
by taking off the two bolts directly over the engine.

PRINTED PAGE 115
COMPOUND CLUTCH
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The drive is communicated from the engine to the transmission
units by means of a compound clutch. Inasmuch as the complete
machine weighs approximately 40 tons, the clutch has been designed
to gradually overcome the inertia of the heavy mass, and for this
reason provides first a slipping and then a positive engagement.
The slipping engagement is secured by means of asbestos-faced cone
clutch which first comes into play, due to the frictional contact
between the leather facing and the cone-shaped flywheel. The
positive engagement of the clutch is secured by the splines or teeth
on the clutch sleeve, which in turn mesh with corresponding splines
or teeth on the end of the crank shaft.
The function of the cone clutch part of the compound clutch is to
simply pick up and start rotating the transmission drums. After the
friction part of the clutch has accomplished this the positive drive
part then is engaged. The point should be made that the epicyclic
bands should and must be free to operate the clutch properly.
The driving-clutch unit is bolted to the flywheel member of the
engine, and is a cone frustrum of carbon steel. The driving cone
carrying the asbestos facing is forced into frictional contact with the
driving member by means of coil springs ⅝-inch in diameter, 5.85
inches long and having 32 coils. These springs are mounted on
plungers of carbon steel, 4⅞ inches long, and ⅜-inch in diameter.
Engagement of the clutch is secured by playing back on the clutch
lever, which forces the clutch collar to slide along the clutch shaft,
first engaging the cone and then engaging the splines on the collar
with the splines on the crank shaft.

PRINTED PAGE 116
Additional pressure is placed upon the cone by the movement of
the clutch collar by means of the large clutch spring, which is con-
centric upon the clutch shaft, and is composed of the coil spring,
having a 5⅜-inch diameter of spiral and a 4¼-inch length of coil.
The spring is composed of five free coils, and two seating coils.
Engagement between the clutch sliding collar or sleeve and the
cardan shaft is secured by means of a coupling of nickel steel. The
coupling is a 9-inch flange, in diameter, and a diameter of 5 inches at
the point of engagement with the splined end of the cardan shaft.
The cardan shaft is nickel steel, 11¼ inches long, with 10 splined
teeth, and a diameter of 2 inches. The diameter of the splined
section is enlarged to 4.359 inches.

PRINTED PAGE 117
The drive is thus imparted through the cone and through the
splines on the crank shaft to the clutch collar. From the clutch
collar it passes to the clutch coupling and thence by means of the
splines on the coupling to the cardan shaft. The preliminary drive
passes from the cone, through the carbon steel key, 4¼ inches long
and ¾ inches thick and ⅜ inches wide to the clutch coupling, and
thence to the cardan shaft. On the rear end of the cardan shaft is
located the clutch pull drum, this being bolted to the flange on the
cardan shaft. A clutch brake or cardan-shaft brake operates on this
drum, stopping the spinning of the cardan shaft in shifting gears.
It is because the cardan shaft is connected directly with the shaft
of the epicyclic gear that it is very necessary that the cardan-shaft
brake be properly adjusted before the machine is driven. It is quite
evident that if the attempt is made to shift into reverse with this
shaft spinning ahead, the driving teeth are apt to be stripped.
Directions of how to adjust the cardan-shaft brake are found on
page 150. The clutch-stop drum is of malleable iron.
When the clutch is thrown out of engagement the crank shaft
rotates freely on the phosphor bronze clutch front bearing. This
has an outside diameter of 4.684 inches, and an inside diameter of
4.002 inches. The clutch sleeve through which the main drive is
transmitted is nickel steel, having a length of 2.687 inches, and
inside diameter of 3.531 inches and 24 splines.

PRINTED PAGE 118
TO REMOVE CLUTCH
When removing clutch, first wire the clutch spring (exterior) to
prevent it from expanding when the pressure is released. Remove
the spring flange bolts.
Remove the air-pump belt from the clutch-stop drum, also the
clutch-stop band pin, and the bolts connecting the band to the
clutch-shaft bracket.
Remove the eight bolts holding the coupling box to the bevel-
pinion shaft and the six bolts holding the clutch coupling to the clutch
sliding collar.
Pull out the pin for fork ends, holding the fork end of the clutch
auxiliary rod to the clutch-operating lever, enabling the clutch shaft
to rotate. The cardan shaft can then be removed by dropping the
rear end and allowing the ball bearings to roll clear of the shaft.
Then remove the crank-shaft nut and gear-lock washer, and pull
the clutch off the crank shaft.
TO RELINE CLUTCH
Remove the old lining and chip off the rivets. New lining is pro-
vided, cut to proper size. If this is not available, a new lining can
be cut to proper size, using page 117 as a pattern. New rivets should
be put in in such a way that they are countersunk below the surface
of the lining so that the metal of the rivet will not bear against the
metal clutch-driving face, or split rivets driven from inside are used.

PRINTED PAGE 119
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The epicyclic gear set has two forward speeds and two reverse
speeds. It is mounted transversely across the machine in the rear
end of the engine compartment. It provides the necessary gear
reduction between the engine drive and the track propulsion units,
and also carries the drive outward on both sides from the center line
of the machine to the exterior track mechanism.
The drive enters the epicyclic gear set by means of a bevel pinion
drive over the engine and clutch, and leaves it in the form of a general
drive to the track propulsion gearing. The gears are shifted in rela-
tion to one another by means of a shifter-fork mechanism which takes
care of the forward and reverse movements, and, in addition to this,
the high and low speed ratio are secured by means of brakes, which
act on drums governing the ratio of the planetary trains contained in
the epicyclic gear box.
The reductions in the box are 5 to 1 on low, and 1.285 to 1 on high.
The reduction at the bevel gear is 14.46. The reduction between the
chain sprocket and the roller pinion is 12 to 23, and between the roller
pinion and the track driving wheel 9 to 37. This gives a total reduc-
tion between the engine and track of 32.545 to 1 on high speed, and
126.64 to 1 on low speed.
The use of the planetary or epicyclic type of gear box on a machine
of this weight does away with the necessity of employing shifting
gears except in the case of changing from forward to reverse. It is
highly necessary, therefore, that the precautions mentioned on
allowing all moving parts to come to rest before shifting from forward
to reverse, be observed. The drive through the various units can
be traced on page 123 and in the chapters dealing with drive units.
The drive from the engine enters the epicyclic gear set by means of a
bevel pinion, and passes to either bevel wheel, depending on whether it
is desired to run the machine backward or forward. Facing toward
the front of the machine, the left bevel wheel provides a reverse
motion, and the right bevel wheel gives ahead motion. Engagement

PRINTED PAGE 120
between the required bevel wheel and the shift is secured by means
of a dog clutch, which slides on the splines of the bevel and epicyclic
cross shaft. Both bevel wheels are in constant mesh with the
bevel pinion, but only one is the driving engagement, due to the
position of the clutch, the other is simply an idler, and has no part in
the driving.
From the bevel wheel, in engagement with the dog clutch, the drive
passes to the cross shaft, thence to the sun pinion, mounted at the
opposite extremity of the cross shaft, from the bevel wheels. The
sun pinion meshes with the large planet pinion, and this in turn
meshes with the annular ring gear, secured to the gear casing. This
casing carries with it the low-speed brake, the same bolt passing
through the annular ring, and the two halves of the epicyclic casing.
The casing also carries the drive back to the chain-drive sprocket,
when it is not restrained in doing so by the application of the brake
mounted upon it. The epicycle gear casing also carries a pin, upon
which is mounted the small epicyclic planet pinion, which meshes
with a small epicyclic spur ring, carried on an epicyclic spur disk,
which in turn is splined to the epicyclic cross shaft. Revolving with
the face which carries the spindle for the small epicyclic pinion is the
high-speed brake, which acts as part of the gear-changing mechanism,
as illustrated in plates.
PROGRESS OF EPICYCLIC DRIVE
The drive through the epicyclic gears is similar on forward and
reverse speeds, except that of the bevel gears. Referring to page —,
the clutch X is shifted by the fork Z so that the clutch engages with
the bevel wheel B for forward speeds, and with the bevel wheel W
for reverse speeds. Other than this, the progress of the drive on
high and low gear is the same.
HIGH-SPEED PROGRESSION
The epicyclic transmission gears are arranged for high-speed ratio
when the high-speed brake is applied on the band G, and the low-
speed brake on the band N is released. Due to the position of these
two brakes and the clutch X being in mesh with the bevel wheel B,
the drive progresses from the bevel pinion A to the bevel wheel B,
and thence through the clutch X to the cross shaft C. From the
cross shaft C the drive goes to the epicyclic disk D, and thence to
the spur ring V. The spur ring V meshes with the three planetary
pinions E, causing them to rotate about the planet pins P, as an
axis, and also to roll around the circumference of the sun pinion F.
This pinion is locked in position, due to the application of the high-
speed brake G. As the planet pinions E rotate about the circum-
ference of the sun pinion F, they carry with them the pinion pins P,
which in turn carry the housing Q. This housing Q is rotating about
