PRINTED PAGE 61
10. Excessive carbon.
11. Poor gasoline.
12. Weak battery or defective generator.
13. Exhaust manifold or pipes of insufficient capacity.
If engine overheats:
1. Insufficient water.
2. Insufficient radiator area or capacity due to covered
radiator.
3. Water pipes dented or broken.
4. Obstruction in water piping or radiator.
5. Failure of water pump.
6. Insufficient oil.
7. Failure of oiling system.
8. Improper carburetor adjustment.
9. Excessive carbon.
ENGINE INSPECTION
To insure engines rendering the maximum service they must be in-
spected daily or at least after every five hours’ run. It is advisable
that these inspections be systematically carried out and that the in-
spector or squad foreman be provided with a form covering the
points set forth in the chapter following. Inspectors should be in-
structed to rigidly adhere to this form and check the different items
off as they are attended to.
1. Examine all valve springs carefully.
2. Squirt a little light oil through the valve springs onto each valve
stem.
3. Examine throttle, spark and all other adjustment controls. Be
sure that they work freely; permit full throw of throttles and distribu-
tors that have not become excessively loose.
4. Test all cylinders for compression.
5. Try rocker arms—they should all be free when the valves which
they operate are seated.
6. Check tappet gap of all valves-piston at firing point.
7. Check valve timing with timing disk.
COOLING SYSTEM
8. Examine radiator, water piping, pump, water jackets, and all
connections for leaks.
9. Fill cooling system.
Note.—If temperature is below freezing, follow cold weather
instructions on page 55.
GASOLINE SYSTEM
10. Examine tanks, trap, piping, and all connections for leaks.
11. Drain water trap.
12. Fill gasoline tanks.

PRINTED PAGE 63
OILING SYSTEM
13. Drain system by taking out plug No. 8133.
14. Remove rear pump cover plate which will release oil-pump
screen No. 8220.
15. Clean screen thoroughly with a brush and gasoline.
16. Replace screen and cover plate using a new gasket, No. 8382,
if the old one was damaged in removing cover.
17. Examine reservoir, cooler, and all piping and connection for
leaks.
18. Oil thrust bearing.
19. Replace all hose connections, either for water, oil, or gasoline,
which show any signs of deterioration.
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
20. Examine all electrical connections at generator, regulator,
switch, battery, and distributor to see that they are clean and tight.
21. Examine all wiring to see that insulation has not become
abraded.
22. Clean distributors as instructed on page 67.
23. Oil generator and tachometer drive.
24. Examine plugs for cracked or loose porcelains. This should
preferably be done immediately after the engine is stopped and while
the plugs are still hot.
25. Check contact-breaker clearance and examine contact points.
26. Check timing of ignition and synchronization of distributors.
Caution.—Leave the ignition switches and the gasoline shut-off
cock in the “off” position.
If the switches are left “on,” the battery will discharge through the
ignition system and generator, and it will be necessary to either
recharge or replace it before the engine can be started again. With
both switches turned off, the ammeter needle should stand approxi-
mately at zero.
ENGINE OVERHAUL
U. S. A. standardized engines are made up of a combination of
units or assemblies, and the units in turn of a number of subassem-
blies. In the chapters which follow the various units are described
in the order in which they should be dismounted.
A list of parts (names and numbers) composing each unit is in the
back of the book.
It will be found that time and space can be saved and confusion
of parts avoided if each assembly be disassembled, inspected, and
overhauled as it is dismounted. Then assembled and laid to one
side until such time as the whole engine is ready to reassemble.
The combining of the subassemblies into a complete engine is out-
lined on page 101.

PRINTED PAGE 65
Shorter and better methods of handling the work may be developed,
but, in the main, the plan outlined here will be found most satis-
factory.
A bench or other suitable place on which parts and tools may be
laid out should be provided.
The mechanic should form the habit of laying out his tools in a
definite order so that the one desired may be readily reached.
Have a bucket of kerosene handy in which parts may be washed.
Waste should not be used for wiping parts. Threads or lint are
likely to stick to the surfaces and eventually find their way into oil
passages. Pieces of clean cloth or rags are preferable.
Nuts such as those used to hold the cylinders down on the crank
case should be screwed onto their proper studs after disassembling—
not only to protect the studs but to avoid confusion in reassembling.
Cotter pins and lock wires which have been badly bent should not
be used again.
Great care should be taken to prevent pieces of cotter pins, lock
wire, chips, or any small parts from falling into the crank case or any
part of the engine. They might work into the gears or oil passages
and cause immeasurable damage.
Have an oil can, full of clean oil, handy at all times. Oil all
bearing surfaces before assembling.
Oil all parts which are press or drive fit.
Oil all bolt and stud threads.
Exhaust manifold studs should be greased with a graphite paste.
Each step in the process of assembling should be finished as the
work progresses. Do not leave a bolt loose or a nut not cottered
with the idea of coming back to it later on.
Never “slack off” or loosen a nut in order to line up the notch in
the nut with the cotter pin hole in the bolt or stud. If it cannot be
tightened still further with reasonable effort in order to bring the
next notch in line, replace it with another nut.
All subassemblies, as they are overhauled and put together, should
be covered to protect them from dust and dirt.
DISTRIBUTORS
To return to the distributors—the circuit-breaker mechanism for
each head is identical with that used in any high-grade magneto
with two exceptions, as follows:
Two main circuit breakers, connected in parallel, are provided
instead of one. The two breakers are timed to operate simultane-
ously and are provided in duplicate as a precautionary measure.
An auxiliary circuit breaker, the function of which is to prevent the
production of a spark when the engine is turned backward or “rocked,”

PRINTED PAGE 67
is also provided. This auxiliary breaker is connected in parallel
with the other two through a resistance unit which reduces the amount
of current flowing through it. The breaker is so timed that it opens
slightly before the other two when the engine is turned in a forward
direction. The opening of the main breakers then results in the pro-
duction of a spark. When the engine is turned in a backward direc-
tion the two main breakers open first and no spark is produced, due
to the fact that the current continues to flow through the coil through
the auxiliary breaker but in diminished quantity, due to the resistance
unit. By the time the circuit is opened at the auxiliary breaker, the
intensity of the magnetic field of the coil has weakened to such an
extent that no spark is produced. A transformer coil is inccrporated
in the Bakelite cover of each distributor head.
HIGH-TENSION WIRING—DISASSEMBLING AND INSPECTION
Disconnect all high-tension cables from the spark plugs.
Remove the screws No. 201 which hold the cable tube clips No.
12283 in place.
Release four clips and unscrew two composition nuts on each dis-
tributor head.
The distributor head, cables, and cable tube may now be lifted
off together. They should be handled carefully to prevent any possi-
bility of breaking the distributor covers and damage to the cable.
Examine these cables carefully, especially at any point where they
may be sent sharply or where they may come in contact with any
metal parts. See that the insulation is intact and that the terminals
are firmly attached.
Examine inside surface of distributor cover and particularly the
contact segments and the path of the rotor brush. The surface
should be smooth and free from scores or scratches.
Wipe out any carbon dust carefully with a soft cloth moistened
with alcohol or gasoline.
Examine the distributor shaft for lost motion between the dis-
tributor driving flange and the driver. This should not be more than
enough to allow about one-sixteenth-inch motion at the end of the
rotor arm.
DISTRIBUTOR BASE
Disconnect the cross reach No. 8333 between the two distributor
assemblies and take out bolts No. 116 from the distributor-base
flanges. This will permit the distributor-base assemblies to be
taken off.
Check the gap on each breaker with a thickness gauge. This can
best be done with the breaker block on the wide lobe of the cam.
The gap for all three breakers should be from 0.010 to 0.013.

PRINTED PAGE 68
Examine the condition of the contact points. These points should
be bright, and in case they have become pitted to any extent they
can be smoothed down on an oilstone. They are very hard and it
will be impossible to file them.
Examine the rubber buffers against which the breaker-arm springs
bear. These rubber buffers are vulcanized to the breaker arm, and
in case they have deteriorated to any extent due to contact with oil
the whole breaker-arm assembly should be replaced.
Examine the breaker-arm springs. Be sure that they have not
begun to crack around the slotted hole through which they are bolted
to the bus bar. The tension of the spring on the auxiliary or middle

PRINTED PAGE 69
breaker should be from 16 to 20 ounces when the contact is open.
The tension on the main breaker-arm springs should be from 28 to
30 ounces when the contact is open.
Examine the resistance unit through which the current passes to
the middle breaker. The coils of this resistance unit should be
separated throughout the length of the unit. If the coils of resist-
ance wire come in contact with one another, the total resistance of
the unit will be decreased and the proper functioning of the middle
breaker will be impaired.
Examine the condition of the face of the cam. This should not
show excessive wear and should be nicely burnished.
Examine the condition of the fiber blocks which bear against the
cam surface. The fiber should extend approximately 3/64-inch beyond
the metal and show a smooth bearing surface.
Examine the carbon brush in the end of the rotor arm. If the
brush has worn down to such an extent that it is less than ¼-inch
long, a new brush should be fitted. In putting in the new brush
and spring, press the brush into place in the rotor arm with a small
punch as far as possible. This will properly seat the spring and will
prevent the brush from extending too far out of the guide. The
rotor brush is a special composition and requires no lubrication.
Examine the ball bearings which carry the distributor cam shaft
for radial and lateral lost motion. This should be only barely per-
ceptible. If it is deemed advisable to replace one or both of these
bearings, the rotor arm should be removed by taking out the screw D
(see fig. 16). The shaft may now be driven out through the cam.
This should be done with a small punch which will permit the key to
remain in the cam. In reassembling the distributor the bearings
should be packed with vaseline and the felt washer with which each
cam is filled should be thoroughly saturated with a good light oil.
This oil will work out through the small holes drilled in the face of
the cam and will properly lubricate the contact arm blocks. It is
advisable also to put a little vaseline or thin grease on the outside
surface of the cam. The studs on which the contact arms are mounted
should also be oiled. Be sure that the contact points are properly
adjusted and the lock nuts are drawn up snugly.
The transformer coil is built into the distributor housing cover.
All connections are made inside and the whole is covered by a fiber
plate which is sealed in place. It is not advisable to remove this
cover plate for any purpose whatsoever.
In replacing the rotor arm be sure that the drive pin in the cam
properly enters the hole in the arm.
Information as to timing and adjusting the distributor assemblies
will be found under the heading of “Timing ignition” (p. 107).

PRINTED PAGE 70
TO DISMOUNT THE GENERATOR
Remove the four nuts No. 101 and washers No. 111, which will
permit the generator to be lifted off.
DISASSEMBLING AND INSPECTION
Examine the condition of the splines or keys on the lower end of
the shaft. These should not show undue wear.
The tachometer drive assembly complete can be removed by
screwing out the bearing assembly (see engine illustration). This
will permit the worm-gear shaft to be withdrawn. The worm gear
and the bronze bushings in which the shaft runs should now be
examined as to their condition. They should be free from bad cuts
or scores. Before inserting the shaft again in the bearing the recess
between the two bushings should be filled with vaseline or other light
grease.
Remove the cap from the upper end of the generator by taking off
the two terminal nuts.
Examine the condition of the commutator and brushes. In case
the commutator is burned or rough it should be polished with a very
fine piece of sandpaper. The best possible condition of the commu-
tator is shown when it takes the form of a bluish polish, which should
not be mistaken for a burned commutator. When the commutator
carries a blue polish on it, it should be allowed to remain this way and
only receive an occasional wiping off with a soft rag.
In case the commutator is badly cut or scored, it should be turned
down in a lathe a sufficient amount to smooth it up. The mica should
then be “undercut.” This work should only be done at a base repair
shop and by experienced mechanics. If the commutator was found
to be scored, the brushes will also be in bad condition. These brushes
are soldered to the brush holders and in case of a replacement a new
brush holder and brush should be fitted. Brushes that have been
roughed up or new brushed should be sanded to fit on the commutator
by wrapping a strip of very fine sandpaper at least halfway around the
commutator and drawing it through one brush at a time. This will
form the brush to the curvature of the commutator. It is essential
that the brushes properly fit the commutator and the work should
only be done by an experienced mechanic.
Examine the wire leading from the field coils to the generator
terminal and its connection with this terminal. Any dirt or excess
oil should be wiped off before replacing the cap.
The ball bearing on the upper end of the generator shaft can be
lubricated through the oil cup in the cap.
This bearing should receive a few drops of oil after every long run,
but should not be lubricated excessively, as the oil is likely to run
down over the commutator.

PRINTED PAGE 71
VOLTAGE REGULATOR
This device, which is typical design, consists of an iron core on which
are wound three coils, the connections of which are shown on the
circuit diagram. The frame of the regulator carries a pivoted arma-
ture fitted with adjustable contact points at one end. The con-
tact points are normally held together by an adjustable spring.
The function of the voltage regulator is to prevent the generator
from delivering more than a predetermined supply of electricity.
The regulator will need practically no attention with the exception
of an occasional checking up of the constant separation and the
length of the brass pin set into the opposite end of the armature.
This pin should extend from 0.043 to 0.045 inch above the surface of
the armature. When the armature is pressed down so that this pin
bears against the end of the core, the gap between the contact points
should be from 0.005 to 0.007 inch. If the contacts are burned or
pitted they may be smoothed down with an oilstone. The tension
of the adjusting spring should not be altered except by an expert and
with the aid of proper instruments. See that all terminals are clean
and tight.
IGNITION SWITCH
The ignition switch should be inspected each time the engine is
taken down for overhauling.
Two resistance units are mounted on the back of the ignition
switch. These units should be examined to see that the coils do not

PRINTED PAGE 72
come in contact with one another. If this should happen the total
resistance of each unit would be reduced, which would result in the
burning of the distributor contact points. It would also affect the
proper functioning of the auxiliary contact arm in the distributor.
If these resistance units should burn out entirely it would shut off
the ignition.
The three screws A should be removed and the switch contacts
under the cover examined to see that they have the proper tension
and that they are clean.
The ammeter which is part of the switch should require no atten-
tion. In case the pointer sticks the instrument should be replaced,
as it is very important that the ammeter should indicate accurately,
so that the exact condition of the generator, voltage regulator, and
the ignition can be determined.
It is advisable that the replacing of a resistance unit or an ammeter
be done at the base repair shop.
Caution.—Always leave the ignition switches in the “off” position.
CARBURETOR
Two ball and ball double vertical carburetors are used on each
Mark VIII machine. These operate as follows:
The carburetor has two important functions to perform:
First. To deliver to all the cylinders of the engine at all times a
mixture of gasoline and air of the right quality to meet the require-
ments in the matter of power and economy.
Second. To so thoroughly atomize the gasoline and mix it with air
in the carburetor that when it reaches the intake header there will be
equal amounts of gasoline going to all the cylinders.
Note.—The first function is largely dependent on the efficiency of
the second and can not be satisfactory unless the second is properly
arranged.
The unusual conditions under which the Mark VIII tractor oper-
ates (going into and climbing out of the holes on grades as steep as
50°—degrees not per cent) make it necessary that the carburetor
perform another function, i. e., meet satisfactorily functions 1 and 2
when operating on grades of 50° uphill and down.
CARBURETOR DESCRIPTION
On page 73 is a diagrammatic section intended to illustrate the
principle of operation.
The gasoline level is indicated by the line L—L and by means of
a pivoted spherical float the level of gasoline remains at the center
of the sphere regardless of the angle of the carburetor.
The throat A has tubes B extending well above the gasoline level
inside the throat and below it on the outside in the annulus C. This

PRINTED PAGE 73
annulus C is connected by passage D with an intermediate mixing
chamber E. The chamber E has in it a vertical hollow screw G
closed at the top and having the gasoline orifice F and the overflow
orifices H located at or a trifle below the gasoline level. The air
passage M connects the chamber E with the space below the throat
through the orifice N. The by-pass orifice P connects through O
with the passage D, and this orifice P is located just above an orifice
R in the throttle Q. An air valve S is shown, but this is not an
essential element. Its use and purpose will be explained later.
The suction impulses of the engine produce a partial vacuum in
the intake header which is communicated to the carburetor and
induces a flow of air through the throat A and the tubes B. The
flow of air through A owing to its ejector effect on the tubes B in-
duces a much higher vacuum in B than in the space above the throat
A. This added force is of great importance in breaking up the gaso-
line. The vacuum in the tubes B is communicated through the

PRINTED PAGE 74
annulus C and the passage D to the intermediate mixing chamber E,
in which the vacuum is somewhat lower than in the tubes B because
of the flow of air through the orifice N and the passage M to E.
The vacuum in E extends through the overflow orifices H to the gaso-
line orifice F and causes gasoline to flow from the float chamber
through the hole J and the metering orifice F and the holes H to the
chamber E where it is mixed with air from M and in the form of foam
is drawn through D and out of the tubes B in such a broken-up con-
dition that complete atomization is easily effected by the main air
stream through throat A.
The reason why this carburetor requires no compensating device is
that the overflow point is at or a trifle below the gasoline level, and
as there is no initial head (or elevation of the overflow point above
the gasoline level) to overcome gasoline begins to flow simultaneously
with the air flow, and as the law governing the flow of gasoline
through the orifice F and air through the throat A are identical it
follows that the quality will be uniform throughout the full range of
operation.

PRINTED PAGE 75
At idling speeds the velocity of air through the throat A is not great
enough to be positive in its action in carrying the gasoline up to the
throttle valve Q. To take care of this condition a by-pass P is
arranged to discharge just above an opening R in the throttle Q.
This by-pass with a very high vacuum at the discharge P draws a rich
mixture of gasoline and air through O and D from the intermediate
mixing chamber E. This is discharged at an angle across the orifice
R in throttle Q, which further breaks it up and at the same time
provides the correct amount of air to make the best firing mixture.
As the throttle is progressively opened the vacuum at P is reduced
and at B is increased until a point is reached where both P and B
are discharging. Further opening of the throttle makes all of the
gasoline discharge from B, but as the source of the mixture is at
all times the intermediate mixing chamber E there is no change of
law governing the flow of air or gasoline and the mixture is correct
at all times.
AIR VALVE
In all carburetors, and particularly in large ones, one difficulty
encountered is the lack of pick-up from slow speed, and “popping
back” through the carburetor when accelerating. This condition can

PRINTED PAGE 76
be improved in two ways: First, reducing the throat diameter to get
greater velocity of air, or second, increasing the richness of the mix-
ture of gasoline and air. The first reduces the power of the motor
except at slow speeds, and the second impairs the economy at all
speeds. The air valve S avoids both these difficulties. This air
valve is small, having a capacity small in comparison to the throat A.
All of the air going through the air valve is added to the amount
passing through the throat A so the inside diameter of the throat A
can be reduced considerably thereby increasing the air velocities at
slow speeds when the air valve is not in action. It is also evident
that with the air valve and the throat in action at all intermediate
and high speeds the quality of the mixture may be such as to give
maximum power and efficiency, and at slow speeds where more
torque is required as the air valve is closed by the spring, the mixture
must be slightly richer, and the ratio of these can be made to suit
the particular conditions encountered.
UNUSUAL CARBURETOR FUNCTION
It must be apparent that any carburetor with a float mechanism
back or forward of the air throat and with the discharge nozzle in
the throat if the top of the discharge nozzle is the overflow point that
carburetor can not function properly except on very small grades.
Attention is called to the fact that in the Mark VIII carburetor the
float chamber is back or forward of the air throat A but the discharge
nozzles B are not the overflow points. The overflow point is at H,
which is at the axis about which the gasoline level changes and is,
therefore, not affected by the changing angles.
Under no condition is pure liquid gasoline passing through D and
the tubes B but a foamy mixture of gasoline and air, so that owing
to its being so largely air it flows equally well through D and the
tubes B whether the machine is climbing a steep grade or going down
a steep decline.
The butterfly throttle valves in each carburetor are parallel and
interconnected by gear sectors pinned to the throttle stems. The
forward and rear carburetors have their throttles operated simultan-
eously by means of a shaft provided with an adjustment at each end
by means of which the pairs may be synchronized.
CARBURETOR ADJUSTMENTS
The sizes of the throats, gasoline regulating orifices, etc., having
been determined by the engine builder, should not be changed except
under extreme conditions. The numbers stamped on these parts
indicate their sizes.

PRINTED PAGE 77
The throats are marked in inches and fractions thereof. The gaso-
line orifices are numbered according to diameter of orifice in hun-
dredths of a millimeter; for instance, 180 indicates a diameter of 1.80
millimeters.
The throat and regulating screw sizes as well as air-valve setting
are marked on tag attached to carburetor and on carton in which
carburetor is shipped.
INSPECTION AND CARE
Owing to the fact that there are no small orifices in this carburetor
there is very little chance of its becoming clogged, but an excess of
water might obstruct the flow of gasoline.
The throttles should be examined to see that they operate properly
and both close at the same time. Float and mechanism must be
in good condition or level will fluctuate and cause unsteady per-
formance. A leaky float causes the gasoline to rise too high in the
chamber. Replace with another rather than try to repair it.
Extreme care must be exercised in assembling to see that all joints
are tight and all bolts and screws must be secured with lock washers,
cotter pins, or lock wires.
TO REMOVE WATER-OUTLET HEADERS
Remove the nuts, No. 101, which hold the water-outlet headers,
No. 12427–8, in place, and lift these headers with the extension tube
No. 12363 and the two hose connections off.
The clamps on these hose connections should be taken off and the
hose examined.
If the hose connections show any signs of deterioration they should
be replaced before reassembling.
Lay the outlet-header gaskets, No. 8153, to one side where they
will not be damaged.
TO REMOVE INTAKE HEADERS
Disconnect the water-inlet elbows, No. 8173, by removing the cap
screws, No. 201.
Remove the intake header nuts, No. 103, and the washers, No. 113.
This will permit the intake headers to be dismounted.
Examine the gaskets, No. 8172, and see that they do not overlap
the openings in the elbows, No. 8173, or the holes in the intake header.
If the gaskets appear to be in good condition put them back on the
studs in their former position and screw on the nuts to hold them in
place.
Leave the water-connection elbows and hose connections attached
to the cylinders.

PRINTED PAGE 78
CAM-SHAFT HOUSING UNITS
Each of the two assemblies consists of a cam shaft with its bearings
and gear—the rocker levers—a cam-shaft housing with its covers and
the cam-shaft drive shaft with its gear, bearings, and housing. The
assembly also includes all bolts, nuts, cotter pins, and small parts
enumerated in the parts list at the end of this chapter.
All parts of the two assemblies (right and left) are identical and
interchangeable with the exception of the cam shafts themselves and
the cam-shaft housing covers.
Each shaft is stamped with a serial number on the plug in the end
opposite the flanged end. Right-hand shafts bear the letter R and
left-hand shafts bear the letter L.

PRINTED PAGE 79
The housing covers are machined in place on the housing and con-
sequently will not interchange.
DISASSEMBLING AND INSPECTING CAM SHAFT
Figure 33 illustrates one of these units.
The following instructions apply to each of them.
The housing assemblies should be dismounted from the engine in
the following manner:
1. Disconnect oil pipe by unscrewing nut No. 8122.
The connection No. 812 may then be slipped off. Put the two
gaskets, No. 157, back in place and screw on the nut, No. 8122.
2. Unscrew the packing nut No. 8066 and slide it and the felt-
packing washing No. 8068 up on the housing. If the felt washer does
not fit sufficiently tight to hold both in place, tie them so that they
will not slip off.
3. Remove 12 nuts No. 102 and washers No. 112 and lay them to
one side in the order in which they were originally assembled.
4. The unit may now be lifted off the engine. Raise it carefully and
evenly so as to avoid risk of bending the studs.
5. Put the washers No. 112 and the nuts No. 102 back in place on
their proper studs.
6. Examine all rocker lever shafts with respect to the fit in bearings.
These shafts should have from 0.005 to 0.010 end play and from
0.001 to 0.0015 clearance in bearings. The bearing fit should be
“free running” and the radial clearance or shake should be barely
perceptible.
7. Remove cam-shaft housing cover bolts No. 178, washers No. 112,
and covers No. 8095 and lay them to one side in the order in which
they were originally assembled.
Caution.—The joints between the covers and housing are “lapped”
and the covers are marked to fit in their proper place. Care must be
exercised in handling these parts so as to avoid marring the surfaces
which come in contact.
8. Examine rocker levers. As each tappet has been adjusted as to
clearance for the particular valve which it operates, the rocker levers
should be laid to one side in the order in which they were originally
assembled.
9. Examine the tappets to see that they are tight and that the faces
do not show undue wear.
10. Examine the rollers to see that they are not cracked. See that
the rollers are free running and show no flat spots. The bearing for
the rollers is a steel thimble which is a free fit in the roller. This
thimble is pinched tight in the rocker lever fork by the pin No. 8083,
which is riveted at assembly in rocker lever. The permissible shake
is 0.001. Roller should have 0.010 side play in the fork of the rocker
lever.

PRINTED PAGE 80
11. Examine rocker lever bearings. See that they are clean and
show no evidences of “scoring.” Scored shafts should be smoothed
up with a fine file and sandpaper. Bearings should be touched up
with a scraper.
12. Remove cam shaft. Take out seven cam-shaft bearing lock
screws No. 8108 with their gaskets, No. 157. This will permit the
cam shaft and six bearings to be withdrawn through the gear end of
the housing. The bearing No. 12250 may be pushed out through the
other end of the housing. The cam shaft bearings are so fitted that
they should come out easily. Should they stick the four screws No.
8219 and bearing cover plate No. 8376 may be removed and the
shaft driven out with a soft plate.
13. Examine cam-shaft bearings. These bearings should have a
clearance on the shaft of from 0.001 to 0.003, which means that the
“shake” will be just perceptible with an oil film in the bearing.
The gear end bearings should have an end play of from 0.001 to
0.003 between the cam-shaft flanges. All bearings should be clean
and free from “scores.” The sets of cam-shaft bearings are
“stepped.” That is, the bearing at the gear end has the greatest
outside diameter. The next one is 1/32 inch smaller; the third bearing
is 1/32 inch smaller than the second, etc. Therefore, to facilitate reas-
sembling, lay the bearings out in the order in which they are dis-
assembled.
14. Examine cam shaft. See that all bearing surfaces are bright
and smooth. Inspect it from the shaft carefully for cracks and soft
spots.
15. Examine cam-shaft gear. See that the teeth are all intact and
do not show undue wear. Unless the gear is defective it should not
be necessary to remove it from the shaft.
16. Remove cam-shaft upper drive shaft. Take off nuts No. 101
and washers No. 111, which will permit the removal of housing No.
8109. A gasket No. 8139, 1/64 inch thick, will be found between the
flange of No. 8109 and the cam-shaft housing.
17. Withdraw the drive shaft and examine the bearing surfaces
and the bushings in which they run. See that the gear is tight on
the shaft and that neither the gear not the splines at the lower end
of the shaft show undue wear. Should it be necessary to change
either of the cam-shaft drive shaft bearings, the new bushings should
be oiled on the outside and pressed in carefully under an arbor press
or in a vise. They should then be reamed to size—the upper one,
No. 8107, to 0.875-0.0005, and the lower one, No. 8092, to 1.125-
0.0005.
All parts should be washed in gasoline or kerosene and blown off
with an air jet.
Especial care should be taken that all oil passages are clear and
free from dirt.
