PRINTED PAGE 181
III. Fittings—Continued.
External—Continued.
1 lock for top door (side doors to fasten from inside).
2 mud scrapers.
1 felling ax.
1 pickax.
2 shovels.
1 crowbar, 3 feet 6 inches.
IV. Tools (to be supplied in tool box with trays and place for each
tool indicated in proper tray):
Mechanics’—
1 fitter’s chisel.
1 drift, round, ⅞-inch.
1 file, half round, 6-inch.
1 file, round, 10-inch.
1 32-ounce fitter’s hammer.
1 pair electrician’s pliers.
2 dozen assorted split pins.
1 screw driver, 9-inch.
1 set box spanners, complete.
1 15-inch adjustable spanner.
1 small spanner.
1 spanner, double-ended, ⅛ by 3/16 inch.
1 spanner, double-ended, ¼ by 5/16 inch.
1 spanner, double-ended, ⅜ by 7/16 inch.
1 spanner, double-ended, ½ by ⅝ inch.
1 spanner, double-ended, ⅝ by ¾ inch.
Tools (E.):
Mechanics’—
6 spanner, double-ended, ¾ by ⅞ inch.
1 spanner, double-ended, ¾ by 1 inch.
1 single-ended spanner, 1-inch.
1 wrench pipe, 9-inch.
1 oil syringe.
4 grease guns.
1 roll insulating tape.
1 roll of 6 feet bare copper wire, No. 18, B. W. G.
Following supplied, but not in tool box:
1 wire cutter.
2 oil cans.
Engine (A.): Complete set of tools necessary for the general care
and operation, to be shipped and carried in special tool box.
Transmission: Any special tools necessary for the adjustment and
care of transmission units to be carried in a special tool box.

PRINTED PAGE 182
Track (A.): Any special tools necessary for the care and mainte-
nance of the track units should include track pin drift, necessary
punches and braces for removing grease plugs. To be carried in
special tool box.
V. Spares:
Engine (A.)—
Spark plugs.
Generator parts.
Coil parts.
Breaker parts.
Distributor parts.
Wiring.
Fuses.
Carburetor parts.
Gaskets.
The above to be supplied in special box.
The following supplied, but not in box above.
Pump packing.
2 fan belts and spare links.
Copper tubing and connections for oiling system.
Note.—This list of engine spare parts is intended as a general
outline. U. S. A. must advise exact spares to be furnished with engine.
Track. (from factory assembled): 1 complete road track shoe,
links and pins, assembled.
Transmission (A.): Brake band linings.
Lighting system (E.):
2 spare bulbs and batteries for torches.
7 spare festoon bulbs.
2 inspection lamp bulbs.
1 Bulb and battery for Hellesen hand light.
1 Roll fuse wire.
The above to be supplied in a tin box. (Similar to ammunition box.)
LOCATION OF MACHINE GUNS
1 on each side in forward end on sponson.
2 on rear end of starboard sponson.
1 on rear end of port sponson.
1 on port side just forward of door.
1 on starboard side of central amm. storage opposite forward end of
door.
SPARE BARRELS
1 on each side in forward end of sponson.
2 on starboard side just forward of side door.
2 on port side just forward of side door.
1 in main turret.

PRINTED PAGE 183
TOWING GEAR
The towing gear consists of five brackets, one on each side of the
lower part of hull just forward of the rear mud chute, one on the front
and one on the back end and one on the roof.
The brackets on the sides are riveted to the longitudinal butt strap
with the shackle pins vertical. The front bracket is riveted to the
front sloping plate and the front floor plate with the shackle pin
horizontal. The back bracket is riveted to the back and rear floor
plates with shackle pin horizontal.
The side, front, and rear towing brackets have a V shackle, 1½
inches in diameter and 2⅜ inches between jaws, and a shackle pin
1½ inches in diameter which is threaded for a nut.
The roof towing bracket is bolted to the roof plate abaft of the
turret by means of six ¾-inch bolts. It has a post 2½ inches in
diameter and 2½ inches high, over which fits a steel cap 5 inches in
diameter and 1⅛ inches high. The post is taped and threaded for a
1-inch set screw, which passes through a hole in the cap and is
screwed into the bracket post. To attach cable unscrew set screw
and remove cap, place cable on post and replace cap.
Each machine is equipped with a steel wire cable 30 feet long by
1½ inches in diameter, each end of which has an eye 4½ inches in
diameter.
