PRINTED PAGE 122
the cross shaft. The housing Q carries the epicyclic spur ring R,
which meshes with the large planet pinions H, of which there are
three. The rotation of the spur ring R causes the planet pinion H
to roll around the sun pinion I, and as it rolls around it carries with
it by means of the large planet pinion T the disk J, which communi-
cates the drive to the shaft M and thence to the track brake K and
to the chain sprocket L.

PRINTED PAGE 126
LOW-GEAR DRIVE
On low gear the brake is applied to the low-speed brake band, while
the high-speed brake G is released. This condition of the brakes
which control the speeds permits of the following progress of drive for
low gear:
The bevel pinion A meshes with and drives the bevel-ring gear B,
and by means of the clutch X the cross shaft C. This carries with it,
idly, the parts D, V, E, F, and G, these being all free to revolve, due to
the release of the high-speed brake G. The pin P, however, is
fixed, due to the application of the low-speed brake N. Thus the
drive goes from the cross shaft C to the sun pinion I, to which it is
splined; thence to the planet pinion H, which rotates within the epi-
cyclic spur ring R, which is fixed by reason of the application of the
low-speed brake. As the planet pinion H travels around within the
epicyclic spur ring R it carries with the pin T and the planet disk J,
by means of which the drive is communicated to the shaft M.
REVERSE SPEEDS
As stated, the progress of the drive on high reverse and low reverse
is exactly the same as for high forward and low forward, except for the
meshing of the clutch X with the bevel wheel Y instead of the bevel
wheel B.

PRINTED PAGE 127
TO REMOVE THE EPICYCLIC GEAR
To remove the epicyclic gear from the hull the following operations
should take place:
1. Remove from the hull the side plates on the right and left end of
the epicyclic gear set and also the outlet louver.
2. Disconnect and remove the oil pump.
3. Disconnect and remove the gasoline-feed pipes running above the
epicyclic gear set, and also remove the radiator and fan, together with
the air duct.
4. Disconnect all control rods.
5. Disconnect and remove the driving shaft.
6. Remove both driving chains so as to release the chain sprocket.
7. Remove the bolts holding the epicyclic gear set to the rear bulk-
head, which leaves the epicyclic gear free to be removed as a complete
unit from either side of the hull.
TO MOUNT EPICYCLIC GEAR SET
To put the epicyclic gear set into position in the hull the space
which it occupies should be cleared of all obstructions and the chain
casing should be in position. After these precautions have been
taken the operations for mounting the epicyclic gears in position is
as follows:
1. Remove from the hull the side plates and outlet louver on the
right and left end of the epicyclic position.
2. By means of a chain hoist or other convenient apparatus lift the
epicyclic gear set into position and place it transversely across the hull.
Place the bolts in position holding the epicyclic gear to the rear
bulkhead.
3. Place the driving chains in position.
4. Assemble the connecting and driving shaft.
5. Connect all the control rods.
6. Connect all the gasoline-feed pipes and place the radiator in
position together with fan air duct.
7. Place the oil pump in position and make the necessary connec-
tions.
8. Replace the side plates on the hull and the outlet louver.

PRINTED PAGE 130
CHAIN DRIVE
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The drive is taken from the epicyclic gear and transmitted to the
track by means of a driving chain. The driving sprocket is mounted
on the epicyclic cross shaft and takes the drive directly from the
epicyclic gear. From this point it passes to the roller pinion which
has the sprocket wheel at its center and the roller-pinion drive on
each side of the center. These roller pinions mesh in turn with the
road track driving wheel, which engages directly with the track; so
that the progress of the drive is from the epicyclic gears through the
driving sprocket; thence by chain to the sprocket on the roller
pinion, and from the roller pinion to the road track driving wheel
which is driven by the rollers on the roller pinion. This drives in
turn the track.
CHAIN-SPROCKET PINION
The chain-sprocket pinion is mounted on the epicyclic driving shaft
and is driven by it. It has 12 teeth of three pitch for driving the
roller chain. This pinion can be slipped off the end of the shaft after
the epicyclic assembly is removed from its case. It is a part of this
assembly and is the unit which transmits the drive from the epicyclic

PRINTED PAGE 132
gearset to the chain. The chain sprocket pinion is a drop forging and
engages with the epicyclic shaft by means of 10 splines. It has a total
width on the shaft of 4 inches. Its pitch is 11.592-inch and its teeth
are 1½ inches wide.
DRIVING SPROCKET CHAIN
The driving sprocket chain is a chain which connects the chain
sprocket pinion on the epicyclic transmission system with the roller
pinion which in turn drives the track driving wheel. The driving
sprocket chain is designed to operate under a maximum working load
of 53,000 pounds and has a breaking load of 150,000 pounds. It is a
3-pitch chain, and has a length of 50 pitches. The chain is made up
of outer and inner bars which connect the rollers. The outside and
inside bars are of 40 carbon, hot-rolled steel. The distance between
the outside bars is 2⅞ inches and between the inside bars 1 9/16 inches.
The outside bars are ½ inch thick and the inside bars are ⅝ inch
thick. The pins are 1 7/32 inches in diameter, and are of nickel steel.
The pins are held in place by a ⅜ inch by 1¾ inch split pin. The
holes through which the pins pass are reamed to 1.231 inches, giving
a 0.005 clearance between the pin and the hole. Surrounding each
pin is an open-hearth steel bushing which takes the wear.
CHAIN SPROCKET AND ROLLER PINION
The chain sprocket and roller pinion is one assembly, being cast
iron and carrying the roller sprocket in the center, and the roller
pinions on each side of the center. The drive is transmitted by the
chain to the chain sprocket, which is an iron casting, also carrying
the roller pinions shaft which is fixed and screwed to the inside and
outside plating of the hull. The chain case surrounds the central
portion of the casing, or that portion that is known as the chain
sprocket.
The length over all of this unit casting which acts as a chain sprocket
and a carrying part for the roller pinion is 19½ inches. The diameter
at the roller-pin bosses is 13.687 inches, and the diameter of the
sprocket is 23.031 inches. The sprocket has 23 teeth, 1.39 inches
wide. The rollers are nickel steel, 2 inches in diameter, and 2.37
inches long. They revolve on pins, pasisng between the bosses,
these pins being nickel steel 5.593 inches long and 1¾ inches in
diameter. The shaft about which the roller pinion revolves is carbon
steel 25¼ inches long and 4.434 inches in diameter.
The casting revolves on the bronze bushing, and is lubricated by
the hole drilled through the center of the shaft, and having leads from
the center out to the bushing. The ends of the hole through the
center of the shaft are sealed by ¾ inch pipe plugs, the one on the
inside being cut off flush after being screwed in, and the one on the
outside being left with its head so that it can be removed for the
purpose of introducing oil.

PRINTED PAGE 133
ROAD TRACK DRIVING WHEEL
The roller pinions mesh with the road track driving wheel. This is
of cast manganese steel, 39.237 inches in diameter, having 35 teeth,
3.735 pitch and 2 inches in width. The tooth operation of the
steel is a manganese steel casting, these two tooth rings are riveted
to a series of diaphragm plates which are in turn riveted to the road
track driving wheel disks. The disks are riveted to bosses of the
road track driving wheel, and this entire assembly revolves on the
road track driving-wheel shaft bronze bushing. This bushing is
lubricated similar to the bushing of the roller pinion and chain
sprocket by means of a lead drilled through the axis of the driving-
wheel shaft to about the center of its length. From this point there
is a lead to the bushing. The opening to the oil lead is sealed by a
pipe plug which is removed when oil is introduced.

PRINTED PAGE 134
The road track driving-wheel shaft is carbon steel, 27.625 inches
long and 4.434 inches in diameter. The bushing upon which the
road track driving wheel rotates is bronze, 5.118 inches in diameter,
and 8 inches long, and interchangeable with the bushing upon which
the chain sprocket and roller pinion rotates. This bushing is re-
newable after wear by simply driving them off the shafts and replacing
them.
TO REMOVE THE DRIVE CHAIN
To remove the drive chain, the following operations should be
followed in the order given:
1. Break the track over the rear mud pocket by removing one
of the connecting links at this point.
2. Roll drive chain around until the key link is on the top.
3. Remove the key link.
4. Secure hold on the end of the chain coming from the under side
and pull it through.
Note.—It must be remembered in replacing the chain that the
oil holes must be on top and the cotter pins on the outside. If
this is not done the cotter pins will catch on the gusset plate of the
epicyclic which have been cut away for the chain links, but which
will not allow the cotter pins to pass by freely.
CHAIN CASING
The track driving chain is surrounded by a sheet steel casing,
6⅝ inches wide and extending around the chain for its entire length.
This case is supported from the outside and inside plating of the
track extensions of the hull. It is bolted in place by means of
angle irons, and is so shaped as to follow the contour of the chain
and to clear the web on the track sprocket. It is housed within the
track-extension plates of the hull.
TO REMOVE CHAIN CASINGS
The chain casing is in two parts, the outer end being a removable
cap fitting over the sprocket of the roller pinion. In removing the
chain casing the following operations should be followed:
1. Remove track over the roller pinion.
2. Remove the bolts from the angle-iron cleats on both sides of
the cap.
3. Remove the cap.
In removing the main casing, it is necessary to remove the track
driving wheel, roller pinion, driving chain, and epicyclic gear. After
these are taken out, the nuts fastening the chain casing to the back-
plates of the hull and the supporting bracket must be removed.
The casing can then be taken out.
Note.—In reassembling, the chain casing must be fixed in position
before the epicyclic gear is mounted.

PRINTED PAGE 135
TO REMOVE ROLLER PINION
To remove the roller pinion, the following operations should be
followed:
1. Break the track and remove the drive wheel.
2. Unbolt the chain casing and disconnect and remove the drive
chain.
3. Remove the nuts holding the shaft bearing (outer end).
4. Insert screws in the tap holes in the shaft bearing at the outer
end and screw them, forcing the shaft bearing out.
5. After the shaft bearing has been removed, the shaft can be
drawn out and the roller pinion removed. This also permits the
floating bushing to be taken out.

PRINTED PAGE 136
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The road track passes in the form of a continuous belt, running
around the entire exterior of the hull. There are two of these tracks,
one on each side of the machine. The tracks are propelled by means
of a road-track driving wheel which carrying the sprocket engages
with the pins on the track links. As the track is driven around the
hull, it carries with it the track links which lay down before the
machine a railbed, over which the machine rolls, by means of the road-
track rollers.
These road-track rollers run on the rail faces of the track links,
giving a continuous rail surface, regardless of road conditions. Thus
the road-track driving wheel through its mesh with the road-track
chain, not only propels the machine but also supplies the continuous
surface necessary for the rollers.
The road-track driving wheel is at the rear of the machine. At the
forward end of the machine there is an idler wheel, which serves as a
guide for the track, and at the same time provides a means of adjust-
ment. The position of the idler wheel fore and aft determines the cen-
ter to center distance between the idler and adjusting wheel, and the
sprocket, and hence governs the tension on the track. Moving the
road track adjusting wheel forward tightens the chain, and moving
it toward the rear loosens the chain.
There are 58 rollers which carry the weight of the machine. These
are known as lower rollers, as distinguished from the top road track
rollers, of which there are two. Of the 58 rollers, 28 are fitted with
spring plates which act as spacers, and 30 are plain without the spring
plates. Since the road track is double, these spacers keep the rollers
which roll upon the track at the proper distance apart. The two
top road-track rollers are alike, one on each side at the point where
the track makes its sharpest angle and where, consequently, the
greatest strains may be expected. Elsewhere along the top the track
slides on the top track rails.

PRINTED PAGE 137
TRACK LINKS
The track links are drop forged steel, having a length from pin
center to pin center of 11.154 inches. The assembly of these links
must be very accurate, and the allowable limit in assembly is 0.004
inches between pin centers; i. e., when links are assembled in pairs
they must agree to within 0.004 inches between pin centers. The
links perform the double duty of binding the chain together, and also
of forming a rail surface upon which the machine rolls. It takes a
left and right link bar to make up one link assembly. These bars are
connected by the pins which are driven through. The pins are sur-
rounded by carbon-steel bushings, which take the wearing stresses,
due to meshing with the road-track driving wheel. Riveted to the
links are the track shoes, which are in contact with the ground. The
track shoes are presssed from armor plate, and so shaped that they
link one over the other. The shape of the track shoe, and the method,
of overlapping is clearly shown above. The track shoe is 26½ inches
in width. Under normal conditions there is a total area of 41.052
square feet of track surface in contact with the ground.
ROAD-TRACK DRIVING WHEEL
The road-track driving wheel has been described in Chapter VI, see
page 133.

PRINTED PAGE 138
ROAD-TRACK ADJUSTING WHEEL
The road-track adjusting wheel is an idler wheel, having no teeth and
running idly with the track. Its sole function is to act as a guide for
the front end of the track, and also act as a track adjustment, by
means of the belt which allows it to be moved lengthwise, thus in-
creasing or decreasing its distance from the road-track driving wheel.
The road-track adjusting wheel has a diameter of 40.187 inches. It
is of diaphragm construction, the units composing it being a solid rim
which runs upon the track surface of the links. The disc connects
the diaphragm with the rim and with the boss which acts as a hub.
These combined units make up the road-track adjusting wheel proper
and in addition there is the adjustment feature, consisting of an ad-
justing screw which moves the entire action of the adjusting wheel
forward or backward as desired. In order to preserve the alignment
of the wheel there is one of these adjusting screws on each side of
each adjusting wheel. The tension adjusting screw is nickel steel,
15⅜ inches long, 1⅞ inches in diameter. It is located within a
bracket of cast steel, and there is a guard in the hull plate for the
track-adjusting screw. This guard or opening is 6¾ inches long and
4¾ inches wide.

PRINTED PAGE 139
TRACK-ADJUSTING SHAFT
The track-adjusting shaft is surrounded by a bronze bushing upon
which the track-adjusting wheel rotates. This bushing is inter-
changeable with the bronze bushing on the track driving wheel and
on the roller sprocket. The track-adjusting shaft is drilled for oil
passages, the holes being sealed by pipe plugs, which are removed for
the purpose of injecting oil. These plugs are ⅜-inch pipe plugs.
The nuts of the track-adjusting shafts are hexagonal, 4⅞ inches in
diameter and 4.18 inches across flats. Inserted in the shaft on the

PRINTED PAGE 140
side is a hard copper plug for locking the track-adjusting screw. As
the adjusting screw is turned it moves its entire shaft lengthwise, as
will be explained.
ROAD-TRACK ROLLERS
There are three types of road-track rollers. Two of these are lower
road-track rollers and the other is the top or upper rollers. The two
