PRINTED PAGE 81
ASSEMBLING THE CAM SHAFT
1. Fit the cam shafts with their bearings in the cam-shaft hous-
ings. If it has been found necessary to replace any of the bearings
the new ones should be tried in their proper places in the housings
to see that they are what is termed a “wringing” fit. That is, they
should be free enough so that they may be turned with a drift to
line up the lock screw hole and still there should be no “shake” per-
ceptible. If a new shaft is to be fitted all bearings should be tried in
their proper places on the shaft. The diametrical clearance should
be from 0.001 to 0.003. Oil all bearing surfaces with clean oil before
assembling. Be sure that punched holes in gasket No. 8379 and end
plate No. 8376 line up with oil hole in bearing No. 12250, and that
screws are wired. Line up the lack screw holes carefully and put the
screws in place with their gaskets.
If a new shaft or new gear is to be fitted be sure that cam-shaft
gear bolts No. 171 are in place before putting on bearing No. 8111
and No. 8112. In the above case leave the gear off until later on in
the process of assembling the engine. (See “Timing Valves,” p. 106.)
2. Put the rocker levers and housing covers in place and test each
lever for free operation.
3. Screw on the cover No. 8088 against its gasket, No. 169.
4. Put the cam-shaft drive (upper) and its housing in place with
the gasket No. 8139 between the flanges. The shaft should turn
freely after the housing bolts are drawn up and the end play should
not exceed 0.008 inch. If the original gears are used they should be
meshed so that the marks come in line.
Permissible “back lash” in these gears is 0.005 inch to 0.010 inch.
LOWER CAM-SHAFT DRIVE SHAFTS
These assemblies, No. 8208, are illustrated on page 56, and each
embodies the parts in list below.
Take off four nuts No. 101, which will release the cover No. 8072
and permit the assembly to be lifted out.
Examine gear and splined socket. Try end play in bearings. It
should not exceed 0.004 inch.
TO DISASSEMBLE CAM-SHAFT DRIVE
Remove nut No. 8142 and draw off gear with gear puller.
Caution.—Do not attempt to drive shaft out through gear.
The keys in shaft will not pass through the lower ball bearing.
After drawing off the gear the keys may be lifted out and the shaft
may then be tapped or pressed out through the bearings and spacer.
The parts of this unit should be assembled in the reverse order to
the above, care being taken that the keys are properly seated in the
shaft and that all parts are drawn up snugly by means of the nut
No. 8142.
Note.—Unless some part of this assembly is defective it is not
advisable to take it apart.

PRINTED PAGE 83
DISASSEMBLING GENERATOR DRIVE
Remove flat-head screw No. 214. This will permit the generator
drive-shaft assembly No. 8210 to be lifted out. One or more metal
shims 0.002 inch thick will be found between the bearing container
No. 8154 and the crank case. The number of shims will be sufficient
to insure the proper mesh of the lower generator drive-shaft gear
with the crank-shaft gear. They should be tied together and hung
up or laid to one side so that they will not be lost or damaged. Ex-
amine gears for wear. End play in bearings should not exceed 0.004
inch. Remove nuts No. 8151.
Do not attempt to drive shaft out, but draw off gear No. 8074
with a gear puller. The same construction is employed here as in
the lower cam-shaft drive assembly and the same caution applies.
Remove keys No. 160 and draw off spacer and bearing assembly
No. 8148.
Remove gear No. 8080 and keys No. 160, which will permit the
spacer No. 8149 and bearing No. 8060 to be taken off.
The bearing No. 8060 is held in place in the container No. 8154
by means of the lock ring No. 8524. If it should be found necessary
to remove this bearing the lock ring may be compressed with a pair
of round-nosed pliers.
The parts of this unit should be assembled in the reverse order to
the above, care being taken that the keys are properly seated in the
shaft and that all parts are drawn up snugly by means of the unit
No. 8151.
Note.—Unless some part of this assembly is defective it is not
advisable to take it apart, as it has been carefully inspected as to
proper alignment of gear teeth.
OILING SYSTEM
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The oil supply is carried in a reservoir provided with a suitable
means for cooling it. Oil is led from this reservoir to the connection
on the right side of the oil-pump body marked “oil in.” It is filtered
at this point through a large area fine mesh screen. A delivery pump
of the gear type takes the oil up after it has passed through the screen
and delivers it under considerable pressure to a distributor pipe
running the entire length of the crank case. Opening out of the
passage between the pump and the distributor pipe is a pressure
regulating valve designed to maintain a pressure not to exceed 50
pounds per square inch on the oiling system.
Pipes are fitted in the case leading from the distributor pipe to
the main crank-shaft bushings.

PRINTED PAGE 84
The crank shaft is hollow and in the center of each main bearing a
radial hole is drilled through the shaft into the hollow center. This
hole in the shaft registers with the corresponding hole in the bearing
bushing once every revolution of the shaft, at which time a small
quantity of oil is forced through into the hollow crank shaft. A
passage leads from each hollow main bearing to the adjacent crank
pin, which is also hollow. A radial hole is also drilled through each
crank pin and carries the oil out on the surface of the pin. Oil
grooves and passages in the connecting-rod bushings insure proper
lubrication for both the forked and plain connecting rods.
The excess oil thrown off the rapidly moving connecting-rod ends
forms a mist which lubricates the piston pins and the cylinder
walls.
Part of the oil conducted to the main crank-shaft bearing at the
propeller end of the engine goes through a passage around this bearing
and up through pipes to the propeller end of the cam-shaft housings.
From the end of the cam-shaft housings it is led around the end cam-
shaft bearing to a passage drilled diametrically through the bearing
midway of its length. Once every revolution of the cam shaft a
hole drilled through the cam shaft into its hollow center registers
with the oil passage through the bearing.
Thus once every revolution a small quantity of oil is forced into
the hollow cam shaft.
The oil is led through the cam shaft and out through holes drilled
in it to each cam-shaft bearing. The excess works out of the ends
of these bearings and collects in small reservoirs to a depth of about
¼ inch. The cams, in revolving, dip into this oil and splash it over
the cam rollers and into pockets in the rocker lever shafts. From
these pockets it is led through the hollow rocker shafts to the rocker-
shaft bearings.
The excess oil eventually finds its way to the gear end of the cam-
shaft housings, over the gears and down the drive-shaft housing into a
chamber just above the oil pump.
The excess oil thrown off in the crank case by the connecting
rods collects in this same chamber when the engine is inclined so
that the propeller end is high. If the propeller end of the engine is
low, this oil collects in a small sump or chamber at the propeller end
of the crank case.
Immediately above the oil delivery pump is located an oil-return
pump, consisting of three gears, and driven by the same shaft as the
delivery pump. The function of this oil-return pump is to draw the
excess oil out of the crank case and return it to the oil reservoir.
One half of this sump draws oil from the sump at the propeller end
of the crank case and the other half draws oil from the sump at the

PRINTED PAGE 86
distributer end of the crank case. Both halves of the pump deliver
oil to the connection on the left side of the oil-pump body marked
“oil out,” from which point it returns to the oil reservoir.
OIL PUMP
The oil-pump assembly No. 8200 embodies the parts enumerated
in the list at the end of this chapter.
DISASSEMBLING AND INSPECTION
Dismount the oil-pump assembly from the engine by removing nuts
No. 101 and washers No. 111. Then:
1. Take out bolts No. 116, nuts No. 101, and washers No. 111.
This will permit the cover No. 8381 of the oil-pump body to be taken
off, and will release the oil strainer No. 8220.
2. Withdraw the oil-pump shaft No. 8148. Examine the splined
ends of this shaft to see that they do not show excessive wear.
3. Bend down the ears of the nut lock No. 8636 and remove the
nut No. 8535. This will permit the withdrawal of the upper oil-
pump screen.
4. Remove four bolts No. 118, which will permit the upper half
of the oil-pump body No. 8189 to be removed. This will expose
two driven gears No. 8177 and a driving gear No. 8187. These gears
should be examined as to their fit in the housing. This can best be
tested by inserting the drive shaft through its bearing in the housing
and laying the gears in the housing in their proper position, with
their bearing pins No. 8179 and No. 8383 in place. The diametrical
clearance of the gears in the housing should not exceed 0.004 inch.
The permissible end play of the gears in the housing is 0.003 inch.
5. Lift the separating plate No. 8188. This exposes gears No. 8178
and No. 8186. These also should be examined as to fit in the housing.
The above clearances apply to these gears.
6. The pressure relief valve may be unscrewed and the valve
No. 8192 and seat No. 8368 should be examined.
ASSEMBLING
The parts should all be washed carefully and assembled in the
following order:
(a) The driving gear No. 8186 and the driven gear No. 8178 on its
pin No. 8383.
(b) The separating plate No. 8188.
(c) The driven gears No. 8177 and their pins, and the driving gear
No. 8187.
(d) The oil-pump body upper half No. 8189.
Note.—This part of the oil-pump housing is located in its proper
position by means of two dowel pins No. 174. Care should be taken
that these pins are in their proper places.

PRINTED PAGE 87
(e) The four bolts No. 118, with their washers and nuts, may be
put in place and tightened up and three of the bolts cottered.
(f) The pressure relief valve may now be screwed in against its
seat No. 8368. Lock wire should be passed through the relief valve
cage and through the bolt No. 118, which was not cottered.
(g) Especial care should be taken that the strainer No. 8230 is
thoroughly cleaned. It may now be put in place and the cover
No. 8381 bolted on. The gasket No. 8382, between the oil-pump
body and its cover plate, should be replaced if it has been damaged
in any way in disassembling.
(h) Clean the upper screen and put it in place. It will be advis-
able to install a new nut lock No. 8536, which may be bent up to
lock the nut No. 8535 after it has been properly screwed down.
CYLINDER ASSEMBLY
Cylinder and valve assemblies may be dismounted by removing
the nuts No. 103 and special nuts No. 8224. Cylinder should be
lifted off carefully and the pistons, when released, should not be
allowed to fall over against the sides of the crank case. After remov-
ing the cylinder the nuts should be put back on the studs and screwed
on just far enough to prevent them from being lost. This will not
only protect the studs, but will prevent confusion in reassembling.
If some old pieces of hose are available, short sections should be
slipped over two studs on opposite sides of each cylinder opening
as shown above.
VALVES
TO REMOVE VALVES
To do this the valves must be held up against their seats and the
springs compressed sufficiently by means of a valve-spring compressor

PRINTED PAGE 88
supplied in the tool kit to permit the lower collar being moved down
far enough to uncover the valve-spring collar keys. These keys (two
parts) may now be lifted out and the springs and valves removed.
The same inside spring is used on both intake and exhaust valves.
The outside spring may be identified by the fact that the exhaust-
valve spring has 10 coils while the inlet valve spring has 12 coils.
Also the exhaust-valve spring exerts a pressure of 45 pounds when
compressed to a length of 2¼ inches, and the intake-valve spring
exerts a pressure of 23½ pounds when compressed to a length of 2¼
inches. The valves for each cylinder have the cylinder serial num-
ber etched on them and are marked “ex” (exhaust) and “in” (inlet),
respectively.
CLEAN VALVES
Clean the valves carefully, and if the valve stems are gummed up
with burned oil they should be dressed down with fine sandpaper.
Examine the valve seats in the cylinder and the face of the valves
which comes in contact with these seats.
The valves should be tested for gas tightness. This can best be
done by inverting the cylinder, with the valves in place, and pouring
a small quantity of gasoline in the cylinder. Watch for seepage
around the valve. If the valves show any leak they should be care-
fully ground in. The cylinder for this operation, should be held in
position by means of the flange at the bottom. An arrangement for
holding the cylinder for valve grinding can be readily made.
Note that in this illustration a light spring is inserted under the
valves to partially counterbalance the weight of the tool by means of
which the valve is turned. An efficient valve-grinding tool will be
found in the tool kit. In grinding the valve it should not be revolved
but should be rocked backward and forward, and frequently lifted
off its seat and its position on the seat changed in order to distribute
the abrasive evenly and to prevent “scoring” the valve. Valves
should not be ground any oftener than is absolutely necessary, and
then only enough to “clean up” the seat. If a valve is pitted or
warped to such an extent that it is necessary to grind it heavily, care
should be taken that any ridge or shoulder formed on the edge of the
valve seat be dressed down with a fine mill file. The abrasive should
be carefully washed off the valve, the seat, and the inside of the cyl-
inder. Test seating of valve with Prussian blue.
Any valves which are badly warped should be replaced and the
valve seat in the cylinder should be trued up with a valve seat reamer
before grinding in the new valve.
Replace the valves, the lower collars, the springs, the upper collars,
and the collar keys.

PRINTED PAGE 89
PISTONS
DISMOUNTING THE PISTONS
Remove the piston-pin retain-
ers by either one of the methods
shown herewith. Press out the
piston pins with a brass drift sup-
plied in the tool kit. The fit of
the piston pin in the piston should
be from a free running fit without
play to a light drive fit. It is pre-
ferable to have the piston pin a free
fit in the piston than to have it drive out hard.
Clean the carbon deposit off from the piston head both on the top
and on the under side. The polished surface of the top of the piston
head should not be marred or scratched if it can be avoided.
Examine the piston for scores. It is very likely that the pistons
will show scratches which were caused during the first run in of the
engine. It is difficult to draw a line of distinction between what is
termed a scratch and a score. A piston should not be discarded unless
the scores extend part of the piston rings and seem to be of recent
origin.
Examine the piston for even bearing on its outside surface. If any
piston shows excessive wear on one side, at the bottom and not at the
top, it is an indication that the connecting rod is twisted or bent.
RINGS
Examine the piston ring
for even bearing on the out-
side surfaces. The rings
should be a free fit in the
grooves, and should not be so
loose that any shake is notice-
able.
Inspect condition of ring
grooves through the gap as to
carbon deposit. If the carbon
is soft and not of great amount
it may be wiped out with a
soft rag over a splinter of
wood inserted through the
gap in the ring. If the
amount of carbon is excessive,
and caked exceptionally hard the ring should always be taken off.

PRINTED PAGE 90
Extreme care should be exercised in removing the rings. They
should not be expanded more than is absolutely necessary to pass
them over the top of the piston. As the piston material is com-
paratively soft, care should be taken not to mar or scratch its
outside surface.
Ring grooves should be wiped out with a soft cloth moistened with
gasoline, and any carbon caked in these grooves may be scraped out
with a piece of wood.
It is preferable to put back the old rings if the wear has not been
too excessive than to fit new rings which have not been run in.
In refitting the rings in the grooves the same care should be exer-
cised as in removing them, in order that the piston surface may not
be scratched or marred. The gap between the ends of the ring
should be not less than 0.025 inch when the ring is fitted in the cyl-
inder.
The pistons are marked as to their location in the engine 1L,
1R, etc. These marks are stamped in the depression on the side
of the piston. In reassembling pistons on rods, the marked side
should be toward the distributor end of the engine. The number
of ounces which each piston weighs over 3 pounds is also stamped
in this depression.
If it was found necessary to replace any pistons, new ones of
exactly the same weight should be selected from the stock.
Caution.—Great care should be exercised in handling pistons to
prevent them from being subjected to any sort of rough usage which
would be likely to spring them “out of
round.”
Do not allow piston with rings to slip by
the counter bore at the top of the cylinder.
It is almost impossible to compress the
rings enough to push the piston down again
without damaging the surface of the piston
or the cylinder wall.
To apply or remove piston rings, use hack-
saw blades with the teeth ground off and the
sharp edges rounded.
The bearing surface on the piston here illus-
trated indicates a bent or twisted connecting
rod. Note that the heaviest bearing is at
the top right and bottom left. The scores
are characteristic of aluminum pistons. The
piston shown should not be condemned on
account of these scores.

PRINTED PAGE 91
CONNECTING RODS
DISASSEMBLING AND INSPECTION
1. After the pistons are all removed, take off nuts No. 105.
2. Turn the crank case bottom side up and take out the small
bolts No. 116 which fasten the two halves of the crank case together.
3. Lift off the bottom half of the crank case, being careful to raise
it steadily and evenly so as not to spring or bend the crank-shaft
bearing bolts.
4. Examine the connecting rod bearings for side play. The bush-
ing carried by the forked rod should have from 0.010 to 0.020 inch
side play on the crank pin. This may be checked with a thickness
gauge. The plain end connecting rod should have from 0.004 to
0.008 inch side play in the forked rod.
5. Remove each pair of connecting rods by first taking off the nuts
No. 13251 and the cap of the plain end rod, then take off nuts No.
13220 and the caps of the forked end rod.
Note.—That the caps and rods are each numbered at the joint
on one side. The caps should always be replaced on the rod with
like numbers adjacent. The bushings are also marked with small

PRINTED PAGE 92
numbers on the flange. These numbers should always be adjacent
and on the side of the rod which bears the cap numbers. Each con-
necting rod is also numbered on the web near the piston-pin end.
The upper number at this point indicates the serial number of the
crank shaft to which the rods have been fitted. The lower number
indicates the position of the rod in the engine, as 1, 2, 3, etc., number-
ing from the distributor end of the engine.
6. Examine the crank-pin bushing carefully. It should show a 75
per cent bearing free from dirt and scratches or scores. Any dirt or
foreign matter should be carefully scraped out. The outside of the
crank-pin bushing on which the plain end rod bears should also be care-
fully examined. Any roughness on its surface should be dressed down
with a fine mill file. Oil grooves and oil holes should be cleaned out.
FITTING CONNECTING-ROD BEARINGS
If the bearing has been damaged or shows wear to such an extent
that it is advisable to replace it, the new bushings should first be
fitted in the forked end rod. Be sure that the bushing seats properly
in the rod and that the dowel does not hold it away at any point.
The caps of the forked end rod should be put in place and drawn up
tightly. Examine the joints between the cap and the rod and between
the two halves of the bushings. Caps and bushings should bear
equally hard at the joints. The bushings should then be scraped
to a free fit on a mandrel 0.003 to 0.004 inch larger than the crank pin.
The cap should now be removed and the rod tried on the crank pin
on which it is to run. The ends of the bushing should be dressed
off with a fine mill file and a sufficient amount removed to permit
from 0.010 to 0.020 inch side play. Touch up the radius at each end
of the bushing with a scraper until it clears the fillet of the crank pin.
Test this point by coating the crank pin and each fillet lightly with
red lead or Prussian blue.
Clamp the rod with its bushing on the crank pin. Revolve it on the
crank pin two or three times, meanwhile pressing it first toward one
end of the crank pin and then toward the other end. Remove the
rod and carefully scrape off any high spots to which the color has been
transferred. It is very essential that these bushings do not bear on
the fillet.
7. With the bushing clamped in the forked end rod dress down the
outside surface at the joints with a fine mill file until they are per-
fectly smooth. Coat the bearing surfaces of the plain end rod lightly
with red lead or Prussian blue and fit it in place on the bushing. Any
high spots on the bearing to which the color is transferred should be
dressed down until the plain end rod has 0.005 to 0.0065 inch diamet-
rical clearance. The roundness of the bushing should meanwhile be
tested with micrometers.

PRINTED PAGE 93
Determine whether or not the
mandrels lie in the same plane by
laying them on parallel bars on a
surface plate.
Check the distance between the
mandrels at each end by means of
a gauge as shown.
To straighten a rod clamp it in a
vise between blocks to protect the
flanges.
To determine the diametrical clearance which a connecting-rod
bearing has, the crank pin and the outside of the connecting-rod bush-
ing should be carefully measured with micrometers. The connecting
rods should then be clamped on to test mandrels, the diameter of
which may readily be determined. Connecting-rod bearings should
be fitted at base repair shops equipped with a complete set of such
mandrels.
8. Examine the bushing at the top end of the connecting rod. This
should show a burnished bearing surface free from scratches or scores.
The radial clearance of this bushing and its proper piston pin should
be 0.001 inch. If it has been necessary to replace this bushing, the
new one should be oiled on its outside surface and carefully pressed
into place under an arbor press or in a vise. After being pressed into
place it should be reamed with an expansion reamer until it has the
proper clearance on the piston pin.

PRINTED PAGE 94
ALIGNING CONNECTING RODS
When new bushings are fitted in a connecting rod, or if an inspec-
tion of the piston would indicate that the connecting rod was twisted
or bent, the rod should be checked for alignment in the following
manner. A snug-fitting mandrel should be put through the bearing
in each end of the rod. These mandrels should be at least 12 inches
long. The rod with the mandrels in place should be laid on a surface
plate and the mandrels checked as to whether or not they are parallel
and in the same plane, as illustrated on page 93. A twisted or bent
rod may be straightened by clamping one end of it in a heavy vise and
springing it with a bending bar. A rod which has been badly bent
should not be used, nor should it be heated in order to facilitate
straightening.
CRANK SHAFT
After the connecting rods have been inspected, overhauled, and
laid to one side, the crank shaft may be lifted out of its bearings.
All bearing surfaces on the crank shaft should be carefully examined.
Unless one or more of the bearings have been completely destroyed,
the crank-shaft surface will be in good condition.
If any crank pin or bearing surface on the crank shaft is roughened
or scored, it should be dressed down with a fine mill file and fine
sandpaper and oil, meanwhile being tested as to roundness with a
micrometer.
Examine the ball thrust bearing. This should show not to exceed
0.008 inch end play. Unless the thrust bearing shows damage or
excessive end play after being washed, it should not be necessary to
remove it. Be sure that it is packed with grease before engine is
finally assembled.
Examine the lock screw through the thrust-bearing retaining nut.
Be sure that it is tightly drawn up and that the lock wire sets fairly
in the slot.
If it is considered advisable to remove the clutch shaft, follow the
instructions given on page 118.
Examine the tapered end of the shaft on which the clutch shaft
fits. If this has been marred or roughened up in any way the key
should be removed and the rough spot smoothed up.
The connection should then be lapped.
Examine the condition of the key and its fit in the shaft.
Examine the crank-shaft gear to see that it does not show excessive
wear.
Examine the plug in the clutch end of the shaft and the plugs in
the ends of each main bearing and crank pin. They should all be
tight and show no indications of oil leakage.
Clean out the oil cavities and passages in the crank shaft and
crank pins. This can best be done by filling each one with gasoline
or kerosene, allowing it to stand for a short time and then blowing
out with compressed air.

PRINTED PAGE 96
CRANK CASE
Examine all bearing bushings in both the upper and lower halves of
the crank case. The bushings should show a 75 per cent bearing and
should be free from dirt, scratches, and scores. Should it be neces-
sary to replace any of these bearings, new bushings should be care-
fully fitted in each half of the crank case. They should then be
carefully scraped to a free fit on a mandrel 0.0025 inch to 0.00325
inch larger in diameter than the crank shaft.
In scraping the bushings to a fit on this mandrel, care should be
taken that the case is supported and clamped down in such a manner
that it will not be sprung or twisted out of shape. It is advisable to
clamp the case at only one point and that only rigidly enough to
hold it steady. Contact between the two halves of the bushing and
the two halves of the crank case should be equal when they are
clamped together.
Examine the crank-shaft bearing bolts and see that the nuts at
the lower end of these bolts are drawn up tightly and properly
cotter pinned.
Examine the threads on the top of these bolts to see that they are
not stripped.
Wash the inside of the case thoroughly and clean and blow out all
oil passages. Extreme care should be exercised in carrying out this
part of the work.
Caution.—The joint between the two halves of the case is “lapped”
and the parts should be carefully handled to avoid possibility of
marring the surfaces.

PRINTED PAGE 97
COOLING SYSTEM
The engine-cooling system on this tank is comprised of a tubular
type of radiator, a Sirocco blower fan, and the water pump which
maintains circulation. There is an auxiliary tank adjoining the
radiator. The radiator is placed horizontally, just aft of the engine
on the port side of the hull, near the top of the engine compartment.
The water is circulated through the jackets, and thence to the radia-
tors by the pump described on page 98. The air for cooling is
forced through the radiator by the ventilating system, which draws
air through a louver in the top of the machine, just aft of the main
turret. The air is drawn through the air ducts and forced through
the outlet louver, which is located aft of the inlet louver, by the
Sirocco fan, having a capacity of 11,000 cubic feet of air per minute.
The radiator has 296 tubes, 38 3/16 inches in length of seamless drawn
copper tubing, giving an actual area of 12,902 square inches or 89.5
square feet.

PRINTED PAGE 98
The Sirocco blower is driven by means of a link belt from the
engine to a bevel gear box, and from the bevel gear box to the fan
shaft by means of a V belt. The ratio of the crank shaft to the
blower shaft is 1.561 to 1.
TO REMOVE THE RADIATOR
Unbolt and remove the air ducts. Disconnect the water, drain, and
steam pipes. Unbolt the front and rear radiator support brackets.
Remove the radiator through the outlet louver. For access to the
work the side plates along the side of the epicyclic gear and the outlet
louver should be removed before starting the work.
TO REMOVE THE SIROCCO FAN
Disconnect the driving belts and allow the jockey pulley to lay on
the floor. Unbolt the air ducts attached to the fan. Remove the
handhole plate on the side of the hull, opposite the fan-rotor spindle,
by unscrewing the bolts.
Remove the nuts at the inner end of spindle and take off driving
pulley, removing outer nut and ball race. Draw spindle out through
the handhole.
Take off the legs (bolted to floor and engine frame) and remove fan
through engine-room bulkhead door. After getting it into the fight-
ing compartment, turn it around to pass through the side door of
fighting compartment.
ENGINE-COOLING SYSTEM
Cooling water is circulated through the Liberty engine by means
of a centrifugal pump running at one and one-half times engine
speed. The capacity of this pump is 100 gallons per minute at 1,700
r. p. m. The cooling system from the pump inlet to and including
the water-outlet header will hold 5½ gallons of water.
The water pump is provided with a single inlet, the outside diame-
ter of which is 2 inches, and two outlets, each one delivering water
to a header supplying the right and left hand cylinders, respectively.
Water is forced into each cylinder-jacket tangent to its outside sur-
face. This construction gives the water a whirling motion inside the
jacket and insures uniform cooling.
The water-outlet pipe for each cylinder extends inside the jacket
to a point very close to the exhaust-valve chamber, which guarantees
the proper cooling of the exhaust valve. The cooling water then goes
through a passage cored in the intake headers. This serves to warm
and further vaporize the incoming gas as well as assist in cooling the
water. These passages in the intake headers are connected by two
water-outlet headers, the final outlet of which has an outside diameter
of 2 inches.

PRINTED PAGE 99
DISASSEMBLING AND INSPECTION
Loosen the hose clamps No. 8453 and pull the hose off the pump:
Loosen the hose clamps No. 8450 and remove the water inlet mani-
folds No. 12123 with the cylinder hose connections No. 8152 and the
extensions No. 12096 and No. 12097 with their hose connections. All
rubber hose should be carefully examined for defects—especially on
the inside. It sometimes happens that the inside layer of rubber will
become loosened and will wholly or partially obstruct the passage.
1. Remove four nuts No. 103 and washers No. 113. This will per-
mit the water pump to be dismounted from the engine.
2. Remove eight nuts No. 101 and the washers No. 111 and take
off the water pump cover No. 12078.
3. Remove nut No. 8214 from the end of the water-pump shaft and
draw off impeller by means of the special tool.
4. Now lift the key No. 159, which will permit the water pump to
be withdrawn.

PRINTED PAGE 100
5. Examine the water-pump shaft. If it is rusted to such an extent
that it is very rough it should be replaced. Examine key and key seat.
6. Examine the impeller to see that it has not been bent or dam-
aged in any way.
7. Examine bearing No. 8056. This should be allowed end play to
extent of 0.005 inch.
TO REASSEMBLE
1. Put the pump shaft with its bearing in place in the container No.
8069. It would be advisable to use new packing in the packing boxes.
A 3/16-inch soft round tope tweed packing is recommended for this
place, impregnated with a graphite grease. A piece approximately
8½ inches long will be required for each packing box.
2. One piece of this packing should now be wrapped around the
shaft and the gland No. 8059 put in place and pressed down until the
packing is properly seated.
3. Compress the coil spring No. 8058 and fasten it in the compressed
state, on opposite sides, by means of twine or soft wire.
4. Now slip the spring in place on the shaft.
5. Put on the second gland No. 8059 and another piece of packing
No. 8213.
6. Water-pump body No. 12071 should now be put in place, the key
No. 159 inserted in the key seat in the shaft and the impeller No.
12073 drawn up into place by means of the nut No. 8214.
7. The wire or string holding the spring in the compressed state
must now be cut and drawn out. With the water-pump body and
the bearing container clamped tightly together the shaft and the
impeller should turn freely. The permissible end play in the water-
pump shaft is 0.010 inch.
8. Put the gasket No. 8215 in place. This should be replaced if it
has been at all damaged in disassembling.
9. Complete the assembly by putting the water-pump cover in
place with its washers and nuts. Be sure that these are all evenly
drawn up and properly cotter pinned.
WATER-PUMP BEVEL DRIVER
Remove screw No. 154. This will permit the bevel driver and
housing assembly to be withdrawn through the opening in the bottom
of the crank case which receives the oil pump.
Remove the two clamp bolts No. 116.
Examine the shaft of the bevel driver and the bushing in which it
runs. Both should be free from scores and indications of cutting.
Remove any dirt in the bushing with a scraper. End play of the
driver in its bearing should be from 0.005 to 0.008 inch. Diametrical
clearance should be 0.0015 to 0.0025 inch.
