PRINTED PAGE 141
types of lower road-track rollers are similar with the exception that
one has spring plates and the other has not. The three types of rollers
are shown on pages 140 and 143. The purpose of the lower road-
track roller is to carry the weight of the machine and provide the
wearing surface which bears upon the tracks, held down by the road-
track links. The machine rolls on this surface upon the steel roller
provided by the track linkage.
LOWER ROAD-TRACK ROLLERS WITH SPRING PLATES
The road-track rollers are mounted between the outer and inner
shell plating of the hull and are carried on shafts which are secured in
position by means of angle brackets and U bolts which suspend the
shafts and hold them in position. The shafts are shaped to fit the
toe of the angle bracket, thus locking them securely against turning,
as well as providing a clearance for the tracks. (Page 143.) The
distance between the inner and outer shell plating along the line of
the lower road-track roller is 22¼ inches. The rollers themselves
roll upon the two double tracks provided by the double set of links in
the track chain.
The rollers are 8¾ inches in diameter and are 4⅞ inches wide.
Holding these rollers in their proper relationship on the shaft, on 28 of
the lower road-track rollers there are spring plates. Between these
plates are the road-track-roller springs, 1 inch in diameter, having
three coils 6.652 inches long under a load of 2,500 pounds. The
spring has an outside diameter of 3.937 inches.
The road-track-roller pin which acts as a shaft for the rollers extends
entirely across the housing formed by the inner and outer shell plates
and is 25¾ inches in length and 2.247 inches in diameter. At its
inner and outer ends it carries a bronze bushing, known as the road-
track-roller tube bushing, upon which the road-track-roller tube
together with the two road-track rollers, rotate.
The road-track-roller pin is drilled partially at each end, providing
an oil passage, and is also drilled radially to provide an oil passage to
the bushing. The road-track-roller tube or sleeve is 21½ inches long,
3.812 inches outside diameter, and 2.75 inches inside diameter. It
carries the rollers, the spring plates, and the spring, all of which
revolve as a unit, together with the tube. The rollers are locked to
the tube by means of a spring-steel split ring of carbon steel, 0.187
inch thick, 0.375 inch wide, and 3.531 inches in diameter.
LOWER ROAD-TRACK ROLLERS WITHOUT SPRING PLATES
The lower road-track-rollers without spring plates are 30 in number
and are similar to the lower road-track rollers with spring plates in
all respects except that the plates and spring are omitted. These
rollers are placed alternately with the spring rollers.

PRINTED PAGE 142
TOP ROAD-TRACK ROLLERS
There are two top road-track rollers, located one on each side of the
machine at the top, at the point where the track has an angle, due to
the contour of the machine. These road-track rollers are similar in
most respects to the lower road track rollers, without spring plates.
The rollers are cast iron, 8¾ inches in diameter, operating on the
tube or cylinder in the same way as the lower road-track rollers, the
sleeve being interchangeable. The top road-track-roller pin is also
interchangeable with the lower road-track-roller pin, and the assembly
is quite similar throughout, except for the shape of the roller.
TO REMOVE THE TRACK
To remove the track, slacken the locking screw and the track-ad-
justing screws. These are the small nuts in the center of the nut on
the end of the track-adjusting wheel shaft. Also slacken the nuts
for the shaft of the track-adjusting wheel on each side of the track.
This allows the following operations to be carried out in removing
the track:
1. Unscrew the adjusting screws on each side of the track-adjusting
wheel until there is considerable slack.
2. Raise the track links over the mud chute until the road-track
link pins are clear of the bulb rail upon which the track slides at the
top of the machine. Pull the two links together as far as possible to
reduce the pressure on the link pins.
3. Remove the road-track-link cotter pins and drive out the link
pin with a drift.
4. Remove the track from the top by pinching the bars or lifting
the ends by means of a crane.
The machine is then jacked up and the track removed from
beneath.
TO REMOVE TRACK LINK
If it is necessary to remove a link in any part of the track, the
easiest way is to break the track over the mud pocket, in order to
get plenty of slack where the link is to be taken out, rather than to
have the slack obtained merely by releasing the tension of the track-
adjusting screw. This will greatly simplify the removal of the link.
TO ADJUST THE TRACK
The track adjustment is accomplished by moving the road-track-
adjusting wheel forward to increase the tension on the track, or back-
ward to decrease the tension. In other words, moving the adjusting
wheel forward is increasing the center distance between the road-
track wheels, thereby drawing the track tighter. This is accom-
plished by slackening the locking screw for the track-adjusting screw;
that is, the small screw in the center of the nut on the end of the shaft

PRINTED PAGE 143
of track-adjusting wheel. The adjustment is then made by screwing
up on the tension-adjusting screw until the desired tension is obtained.
TO REMOVE THE ROAD-TRACK-ADJUSTING WHEEL
After removing the track, slacken the locking screws and remove
the nuts from both ends of the shaft. Unscrew both tension-adjust-
ing screws until clear of the shaft. Remove the outside track-adjust-
ing bracket and drive the shaft through the opening. The adjusting
wheel should be blocked up before drawing the shaft.
TO REMOVE THE ROAD TRACK DRIVING WHEEL
After removing the track, block up the driving wheel. Remove the
locking plates for shaft ends on both sides of the wheel. Unscrew the
track driving wheel nuts. Remove the bolts holding the shaft bearingr
(outer end).
Insert screws in the tap holes in the shaft bearing (outer end) and
screw them in, forcing the shaft bearing out. After removing the outer
shaft bearing the shaft can readily be pushed out from the inner end.
The driving wheel is then removed and the floating bushing taken
out.
TO REMOVE TOP ROAD TRACK ROLLER
After removing the track, remove the nuts from the road track
roller pin staple, or U bolt, removing the staple. Remove the bolts
on the roller support angles and remove the angles themselves, after

PRINTED PAGE 144
which the road track roller pin can be forced out the outer side of
the hull. The road track rollers can then be removed and the float-
ing bushings taken out. The inner end of the rollers can be reached
through the engine room.
TO REMOVE LOWER ROAD TRACK ROLLERS
Jack up the machine from the ground by placing jacks so as to put
the weight of the machine on the hull plating. Then remove the
track in accordance with the directions given on page 142. Remove
the nuts on the road track roller pin staple and take off the staple.
Unscrew the plates on the roller support angle and remove them,
after which the lower road track roller pin can be driven out of the
end. The road track roller can then be removed and the floating
bushing taken out.
TO REMOVE ROLLER SPRING
Remove the roller from the machine in accordance with directions
given alone. Apply pressure on the road track roller spring plate,
compressing the spring and removing the tension on the road track
rollers. Separate the nuts of the spring steel split spring on the roller
pin outside the roller until it is expanded to pass over the shoulder in
the road track roller pin. The road track roller and roller spring
plate can then be removed and the spring taken off.
TO REMOVE ROLLER PINION
After removing the track and drive wheel, unbolt the chain casing
and disconnect and remove the drive chain. Unscrew the nuts holding
the shaft bearing (outer end).

PRINTED PAGE 145
Insert screws in the tap holes in the shaft bearing (outer end) and
screw them in, forcing the shaft bearing out. After the shaft bearing
has been removed the shaft can be drawn out and the roller pinion re-
moved and the floating bushings taken out.

PRINTED PAGE 146
CONTROL SYSTEM
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The entire control is operated from the driver’s seat, located at
the forward end of the hull proper. The driver’s seat and the for-
ward control unit, including the necessary levers, shafts, and linkage,
are made up as a single assembly. The driver has a pedal and four
levers to operate, exclusive of the spark and throttle levers. The
pedal is the brake. The inner left lever is a speed control for the
left track and the inner right lever is the speed control for the right
track. The outer left lever is the clutch and the outer right lever
the reverse.
The change-speed levers are similar for the left and right tracks.
The lever engages in two quadrant jaws, the outside taking care of
high speed and the inside taking care of low speed. When the lever
is engaged with the high or low speed jaw of the quadrant and pulled
back, the speed is engaged. Directions for starting and stopping are
given on page 14, together with driving instructions. A description
of the method of operation of the control system is taken up in this
chapter.
SPEED CONTROLS
High or low speed controls and reverse are accomplished by mov-
ing the speed control and reverse levers to the proper position, which
in turn moves a series of links which apply the high-speed or low-
speed brakes in the epicyclic gear, or, in the case of the reverse,
mesh the driving clutch on the epicyclic shaft so that the proper
bevel ring gear is driven.

PRINTED PAGE 148
The clutch lever operates the compound clutch by means of linkage
which extends to the throw-out-collar, and so connects that the clutch
is out when the lever is pulled back. As the lever is pulled back it
applies the brake on the cardan shaft of the clutch, as well as dis-
engaging the clutch itself.
The brake pedal is interconnected by means of a swing link with
the shifter levers so that the brake only applies to the track which
is in neutral. This is accomplished by arranging the links so that
they are end to end when the shifter lever is in neutral position, and
at an angle when in high or low speed. Thus when the brake pedal
is applied, the links which are in a straight line or end to end transmit
the motion to the brake, whereas in the high or low position of the
shifter lever the motion of the brake pedal simply takes up the
linkage which is at the angle and does not communicate any motion
to the track brake.
STEERING
This interconnection of the linkages is made use of to accomplish
steering. If one track is put in neutral and the other in a forward
position, either high or low, and the brake is applied, the track which
is in neutral will be stopped, allowing the machine to be slid around
in the direction of the stationary track. In making turns which are
not as sharp it is only necessary to put one track in neutral, leaving
the other engaged, which will cause the machine to swing around.
Another method of turning in a long arc would be to have one track
engaged in high and the other in low, which would make one track
move faster than the other and consequently causing the machine to
turn. In other words, any difference in speed between the two tracks
causes the machine to swing around, and thus it is steered.
SPARK AND THROTTLE
Mounted near the driver’s seat on the inside of the hull are the
spark and throttle levers as shown on page 16. These levers are
exactly similar, the throttle being to the right and the spark to the left.
CONTROL LINKAGE
The layout of the control linkage is shown on page 147. The con-
trol levers for operating the speeds are 37 inches in length, and are
of carbon steel, engaging with the carbon steel selector levers. These
are so shaped that they form a gate for the lever, allowing it to move
either the low-speed selector or the high-speed selector. As the high-
speed lever is pulled back it moves about a fulcrum shaft, which is
of carbon steel, 24¾ inches long and 1.497 inches in diameter. The
linkage leads back from this fulcrum shaft to a shaft in the center of
the machine, which serves to break the length of the link rods. By

PRINTED PAGE 149
means of clevis connections and toggle joints the control is passed
along backward to the high and low speed brake toggles, which operate
the control brakes on the high and low speed drums of the epicyclic
gear.
BRAKE CONNECTIONS
The track brakes are on each side of the epicyclic, just inside the
chain sprocket, on the epicyclic shaft. As briefly explained, the link-
age of the brake is so arranged that only the brake on the side in
neutral is applied. The linkage is so interconnected that when the
shifter lever is moved to neutral, the brake bands just clear the drum.
Application of pressure on the pedal, therefore, results in immediate
pressure on the drum. The brake pedal is a malleable-iron casting
35¼ inches long over all, the pedal being 8 inches long by 5 inches
wide, I-section. The connections of this pedal, which is a bell crank,
connected with a series of toggles and links, are clearly illustrated on
page 147. The brake rods are held back in three sections as in the
case of the other control rods, so as to break their length, and at the
same time secure the necessary reduction.
THE CLUTCH LEVER
The clutch lever is a carbon steel lever in the form of a bell crank.
The hand end is 28½ inches long from the center of the fulcrum to
the end. The bell-crank end is 5 inches long. This connects with
the toggle joint, mounted on the shaft, directly behind the lever

PRINTED PAGE 150
fulcrum shaft, and the rods extent backward to the main clutch
operating the clutch throw-out lever, which removes the cone from
engagement with the flywheel and also the driving box on the clutch
shaft.
REVERSE LEVERS
The reverse lever is a carbon steel piece of bell-crank form, being
27.968 inches long on the hand side of the fulcrum and 6 inches on
the bell crank. It engages with the reverse rod, which is 52 inches
long, and made of extra strong ¾-inch wrought-iron pipe. Similar
to the other control rods, this is in three sections, front, center, and
rear, carrying the motion of the reverse lever back to the rear control
assembly, where the necessary motion is imparted to operate the
shifter fork for the clutch in the epicyclic gear. The linkage is out-
lined clearly on page 147. The necessary motion for shifting the fork
is transverse, and thus secured by bell-crank levers from the reverse
rods.
TO ADJUST THE CARDAN BRAKE
The cardan brake is operated by means of the clutch stop rod.
This is coupled at one end to the left clutch lever, which is threaded
and has two nuts between which is the clutch-stop bell crank.
Through the opposite end of the left clutch lever passes the clutch-
stop eye-rod bolt with the end of the clutch band.

PRINTED PAGE 151
The bell crank operates against the clutch-stop spring. By regu-
lating the length of the spring and also the position of the bell crank
between the clutch-stop rod nuts, the cardan brake can be adjusted.
(See Plate 95.)
TO ADJUST THE CLUTCH THROW-OUT
The clutch throw-out is adjusted by means of the fork ends or
clevices on the clutch-control rods. The adjustment is made as
nearly as possible by the use of the fork ends. The final adjustment
is made by screwing up on the fork end of the rear clutch auxiliary
rod, which connects the clutch auxiliary operating lever to the clutch
operating lever.
TO ADJUST THE HIGH-SPEED BRAKE
The first adjustments are made by screwing up on the fork ends
or clevices of the control rods. The adjustment can most easily be
made underneath the center ammunition storage by slacking the
lock nut and turning the fork end to the desired location.
The above adjustments are what might be called permanent
adjustments.
The final adjustment is made on the high-speed brake band by
means of the adjusting screw (high-speed brake) which passes

PRINTED PAGE 154
through the brake lever and connected by a pin to the high-speed
brake band (short end), passing up from the under side of brake.
One end of the brake lever is connected with the rear control rod;
the other with the high-speed brake band (long end). The adjust-
ment is made by screwing the adjusting nut which compresses the
high-speed brake suspension spring between the brake lever and the
shoulder on the adjusting screw on page 155.
TO ADJUST THE LOW-SPEED BRAKE
The first adjustments are made by screwing up on the fork ends or
clevices of the control rods, the fork ends between the front and center
control rods, underneath the center ammunition storage being where
the adjustment can most easily be made, by slacking the lock nut and
turning the fork end or clevice to the desired location.
The final adjustment is made on the low-speed brake band by means
of the brake-adjusting screw which passes through the brake lever
and is fastened by a pin to the low-gear brake-band ear (upper), the
brake lever.
TO RELINE HIGH-SPEED BRAKE
After removing the epicyclic gear from machine, disconnect the
high-speed brake and remove in the following order:
Remove cotter pins from the free end pins and drive out the pins
with a drift.
Remove the bottom band stop by unscrewing the top bolt holding
it to the anchor bracket.
Unscrew the tap bolts holding the top band stop to the epicyclic
frame. The top band stop and backband stop can then be removed.
Remove cotter pin and drive out anchor pin. Unscrew tap bolts
fastening the anchor bracket to frame and remove the anchor bracket.
Rotate strap around clockwise to remove the six ⅜-inch set
screws, uncoupling the long and short end brake bands which would
then be free to be removed.
Shear the rivet heads and remove the old lining.
The new lining to be cut, if necessary, to page 153, the holes drilled
as shown.
TO RELINE LOW-GEAR BRAKE
After removing the epicyclic gear from the machine, slacken the
tension on the brake-adjustment spring and remove the cotter pins
and drive out the brake pins from the upper and lower free ends of
the brake band.
Remove the brake stop by unscrewing the nut of the bolt fastening
it to the epicyclic frame.

PRINTED PAGE 156
Remove the anchor pin, freeing the brake band from the brake-
suspension link, and the brake band can then be rotated clockwise to
remove the set screws, uncoupling the top and bottom brake bands
which would then be free to be removed.
The new lining is to be cut, if necessary, and holes drilled.
TRACK BRAKE
The track brake is to be removed the same as low-gear brake, the
new lining to be cut and drilled to sketch being fastened to the lower
low-gear brake-band ear.
The adjustment is made by screwing the adjusting nut which com-
presses the brake-adjusting spring between the brake lever and a
shoulder on the brake-adjusting screw.

PRINTED PAGE 158
TO ADJUST THE TRACK BRAKE
The track brake is adjusted in a similar manner to the low-speed
brake, the same nomenclature and method being used.
BRAKE-CONTROL LINKAGE REDUCTION
The reduction of the brake linkage for the epicyclic gear and for the
tracks is as follows:
The track pedal throw, measured to the center of the foot pedal, is
11.088 inches. The movement of the brake band is 0.3696 inch.
These dimensions are approximate.

PRINTED PAGE 160
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The Mark VIII machine is equipped with Bijur starting and light-
ing apparatus designed for operation with a 6-volt battery and con-
sisting of:
One (1) type L–61 M–1108 anticlock rotation lighting genera-
tor;
One (1) type AD–200 M–923 anticlock rotation starting
motor;
One (1) type TI–61 M–865 motor starting switch.
The generator is in operation at all times the engine is in operation.
The starting motor is in operation only during the period of start-
ing.
WIRING
Page 161 shows the wiring layout on the machine and covers the
ignition generator (Delco make) as well as the wiring for the Bijur
apparatus, heretofore mentioned.
The Bijur generator is grounded internally and only one cable
leads from same, the frame of the machine acting as a common
return conductor. The generator is connected direct to the battery,
as no fuse is required in the generator battery circuit.
The circuit between the storage battery, starting switch, and the
starting motor is made up with heavy cable, and this circuit does
not make use of the machine frame as a return circuit.
SPECIAL STARTING INSTRUCTION
The starting motor using a 6-volt 140-ampere hour battery is not
intended to crank the gas motor when cold without manual help at
the hand crank.
