PRINTED PAGE 161
TO START THE GAS MOTOR
First, see that all necessary adjustments for the gas motor have
been made; insert the hand crank and exert upward; pull on crank.
When ready to start, signal operator at the starting switch to depress
starting-switch button, at the same time giving the motor all possible
assistance in turning over.
The starting switch should be depressed downward as far as it will
go and held firmly in place until the gas engine begins firing. The
instant the gas engine begins firing, release the starting-switch but-
ton. Should the gas motor fail to start promptly after cranking it
with the starting motor, do not continue to crank it, but first see
that proper adjustments for starting have been made, that there is
gasoline in the carburetor, and that the ignition is in working order.
Continued cranking of the gas engine with the electric starter will
not damage the electrical equipment but constitutes a useless drain
on the battery and should be avoided.

PRINTED PAGE 162
STARTING MOTOR
OPERATION AND DESCRIPTION
The starting motor is a series wound, four-pole machine designed
for operation on a 6-volt battery, and is equipped with a Bijur
automatic pinion-shifting device mounted on its armature shaft for
transmitting power from the starting motor to the flywheel.
No intermediate linkage or preliminary contact resistance switch
is required to bring the pinion of the starter motor into mesh
with the flywheel teeth to crank the gas motor. A double-contact
single-pole switch connects the starting motor directly across the
battery and the instant that the switch is closed cranking is auto-
matically accomplished.
When the starting-switch pedal is depressed the starting motor
to battery circuit is closed and the machine begins to operate under
full power, the pinion shifting device mounted on the threaded end
of the armature shaft automatically meshing with and transmitting
power to the flywheel teeth, thus cranking the gas motor.
The instant that gas motor begins firing, the overriding speed at
which the starter pinion is driven by the flywheel with respect to the
armature shaft causes the device automatically to travel along the
threaded shaft and disengage the flywheel teeth.

PRINTED PAGE 163
STARTER PINION SHIFT
The pinion-shifting device is positive in every respect and will
crank the gas motor every time the starting switch is closed. It is
impossible under normal operating conditions for the starting pinion
to “butt” or “jam” against the teeth of the flywheel, as the pinion
will always go into mesh with the flywheel teeth for reasons which
will be fully described later.
The operation and construction of the automatic gear-shifting
device used in connection with the starting motor may be best under-
stood by reference to B/P 138 and the description that is to follow:
Referring to page 162, the pinion mentioned above shown by Figure
No. 4 is driven by notches in the barrel (6) registering with the
pinion teeth. This barrel has 6 slots cut about ¾ inch deep in its
other end, in which the notched clutch plate (12) registers. The
cork clutch (13) is held in place against (12) by means of the notched
retainer (27) and its right-hand face can slip slightly against the
smooth ground face of the flanged nut (14) whenever the torque
exceeds the frictional hold between the cork and steel faces, this
holding force being set up by the initially compressed spring (11).
Power is thus transmitted in the working position from the shaft
to the flanged nut (14), thence to the clutch (13), the retainer (27),
clutch plate (12), barrel (6), and thus to pinion (4).

PRINTED PAGE 164
The cover (19), which fits into and over the notched barrel (6),
effects closure of the shift when locked in place by spring cover lock
(20).
In addition to the cork clutch there is a fixed clutch mounted on the
other face of the pinion flange and shown at (15). This clutch is
held against the flange by means of the clutch-spring washer (16),
sleeve (17) and wire-lock spring (18). It is called “fixed” because
the torque necessary to cause it to slip is constant irrespective of the
position of the flanged nut.
Normal entrance is effected by depressing the starting-switch
pedal, causing the shaft to rotate within the flanged nut (14), the
inertia of which causes a difference in speed between the shaft and the
nut with the result that the nut travels along the threaded shaft (28)
and urges the entire assembly of barrel and pinion through the
spring (11) into mesh. The spring (11) rests at its left-hand end
against a flanged plate (5) riveted to the pinion. When the nut gets
to the end of its stroke it first compresses a pair of dished washers
(shown at 8) through a pair of thrust-bearing washers (9) and (26).
It is the combined object of the dished washers, as well as the clutch,
to take up the shock of starting. The helical spring (11) plays little,
if any, role in this. Of course, when the clutch face rises enormously,
that is, to say, the clutch becomes self-tightening to meet the load
applied.
Coming out of mesh is caused by the overriding speed of the
pinion barrel and flanged nut assembly with respect to the revolving
armature shaft. The outcoming blow is cushioned by the spring (21)
mounted on the flanged nut.
The purpose of the clutch plate (15) is to get sufficient initial
clutch tension added to the clutch (13) to avoid slippage when a
“butt” occurs.
Whenever a pinion tooth “butts,” that is, strikes the corresponding
end of a flywheel tooth, this interference is almost constantly over-
come by the following action which takes place: The pinion is now
kept from entering the flywheel teeth and the traveling nut compresses
the spring (11), urging the notched barrel (6) forward along the teeth
of the pinion. Finally, the clutch plate (12) strikes the washer (26)
locking up, or rather tightening, the clutch (13), and in turn causes
the nut (14) to turn with the shaft. The barrel (6) is therefore
turned by the notched plate (12) and in turn transmits its rotative
effort to the pinion (4), releasing the “butting” pinion tooth from its
interference. The instant this happens the spring (11) having been
greatly compressed by the previous action, snaps the offending tooth
into mesh with the flywheel and normal cranking takes place.
The function of the weak springs (3) is to prevent “ticking in” of
the barrel and pinion, especially when the tank is running down hill.

PRINTED PAGE 165
TESTS TO INSURE CORRECT FUNCTIONING
The shift should always be checked for the gap between the edge
of the flywheel and the pinion teeth. This distance must always
be ⅜ inch. In testing the shift, run the barrel along the threads by
hand and note whether there is the proper freedom of action, that is,
whether the shaft is free from burrs or rust. Care should be taken
that there is sufficient lubricant, oil, or graphite on the threads of the
armature shaft (28) and between washers (9) and (26), washers (23)
and (24).
In order to test the shift for initial torque of its clutches, a brake
should be made to fit over the pinion (4) having a lever arm 1 foot
in length. The armature shaft can then be held from turning by
means of an open wrench on the commutator end hexagon shaft nut
and force applied by hand to the end of the brake arm through a
spring scale with the barrel in the “out” position. The number of
foot-pounds necessary to slip the barrel in this “out” position should
always be greater than 4½ to 5 pounds on the scale and may, how-
ever, be as much as to 12 or 15 pounds without affecting the correct
functioning of the shift. If it is less than 4½ pounds a dangerous
condition arises in case there is too tight meshing of the pinion in the
flywheel. Such cases frequently require 8 to 10 pounds initial
clutch torque to cause the pinion to enter and a 4½-pound clutch
under such conditions would slip.
TROUBLES AND REMEDIES
(1) Slipping clutches.—There are two forms of clutch slip. The
first is initial clutch slip, which has just been described, and the
second is clutch slip, which takes place in the “in” position.
In the first case three-quarters of the initial clutch value lies in the
outside or fixed clutch applied through the dished spring washer (16).
It is usual to look here or in the length of the sleeve (17) for the cause
of intial clutch torque weakness. In the case of clutch slipping when
in cranking or “in” position this can be attributed either to a great
excess of oil or lubricant on the cork face of the clutch or to a mutilated
cork surface. In case the projections on back of retainer (27) shear
in clutch plate (12), slippage is likely to occur, and can be remedied
only by supplying a new retainer.
(2) Sticking.—This can happen either in the “in” or “out”
position. In the “out” position it is usually caused by too tight a
fit of the flanged nut on the armature-shaft threads, and can be
determined as aforesaid by revolving the barrel on the threads, to
feel if the mechanism is free, or it may be due to dirt on the face of
the thrust washer (23) which the flanged nut strikes in this position.
The remedy is this: Remove the nut (25) and thoroughly clean
parts (23) and (24) as well as the back of the flanged nut. Be sure

PRINTED PAGE 166
to place graphite between washers (23) and (24) when reassembling.
If the flanged nut is not perfectly free on the threaded shaft, dis-
assemble the entire shift, beginning with spring lock (20), and “lap
in” the nut on the threads, using a mixture of kerosene and emery
dust. Be sure to clean the shaft and nut carefully with gasoline
before reassembling. Washers (9) and (26) leave the factory with
graphite between their faces and it is always well to make sure that
some is put between them before reassembling, especially after clean-
ing the shaft with gasoline. When disassembling it is not necessary
to disturb the various parts mounted on the flanged nut.
Stick in the “out” position can also be caused by the back nut (25)
becoming loose. This makes the “out” stop take place between the
back end of pinion (4) and shaft nut (7) instead of between the faces of
(24) and (25). Sticking here occurs because the parts (4) and (7) are
relatively soft, and any hammering or rubbing of the pinion (4) against
the face of shaft collar (25) will roughen the butting faces, causing
sticking. There is a gap between (4) and (7) in normal working of
the device.
Sticking in the “in” position may be due to dirt or grit getting
between the washers (9) and (26) on inside of the barrel, spring lock
(10) becoming dislocated, or clutch plate (12) cutting into washer (26).
Be sure that the striking face of clutch plate (12) is polished clean and
that plenty of graphite and lubricant are between washers (9) and
(26). In case the striking face of (12) and the inside washer (26) are
cutting each other, it is best to communicate with the factory and
order new parts.
(3) Shock.—This may be due to the flattening of washers (8), or,
where too tight, gripping action of clutch (13) occurs. In the case
of washer flattening, do not attempt to repair these, but replace with
new ones. A very little graphite or oil applied to the cork clutch
surface will usually remedy a tight clutch and reduce shock.
(4) Precautions.—In making repairs to shift do not replace any
defective or worn parts other than those supplied directly from the
Bijur factory. All the parts making up complete assembly are either
made of special material or are given a special heat treatment, and
the substitution of inferior or improperly treated materials will not
allow the satisfactory operation of the shift.
CONSTANT CURRENT GENERATOR
OPERATION AND DESCRIPTION
This is a self-contained unit with no regulator or automatic cut-out
requiring separate mounting and adjusting. The automatic switch
for opening and closing the circuit between the storage battery and
the generator is mounted inside of the generator. The regulation of
the so-called constant current generator is inherent and no separate
regulator is required.

PRINTED PAGE 167
The amount of current generated is, to a large extent, independent
of the state of charge of the storage battery or the amount of lamp
load connected, but depends primarily upon the speed at which
machine is driven and the position of the regulating brush with respect
to the two main brushes.
Beginning at zero speed, the voltage is of course zero, and with
increasing speed the voltage increases until the armature develops
6.5 volts, at which value the shunt coil of the cut-out is sufficiently
energized to cause the cut-out switch to close.
After the cut-out is closed the generator begins to deliver current to
the battery or to both the battery and the light, if lights are in use.
The point at which the cut-out closes (6.5 volts) corresponds to
approximately 500 to 600 generator r. p. m. With increasing speed
the current increases to a maximum value, at speeds of about 1,400 to
1,600 r. p. m.; at higher speeds the current decreases slightly.
The constant current generator has a single shunt winding dis-
tributed over four poles and the regulation is effected by having this
winding connected between one of the main generator brushes and an
auxiliary or regulating brush, and about 60° from this main brush.
The maximum current generated depends upon the location of the
third brush with respect to the main brush to which one side of the
shunt field is connected. Moving the third, or regulating brush, in
the direction of rotation of the armature increases the generator
output, and in direction opposite to the rotation of armature
decreases the output.
REGULATOR
Referring to page 163, showing the commutator end housing of
the type L–61 generator, and considered for clearness to be trans-
parent, the third brush and the two main brushes are indicated by
name, the third brush adjusting hole at B, and the main switch-
adjusting nut at A. Figure 165 shows all internal connections for
the shunt winding, brushes, and the main switch.
Due to the fact that the voltage regulation of all third brush
generators is effected by means of the reaction magnetic flux set
up by the current flowing through the armature, it is necessary to
introduce some protective device, such as a fuse in the field circuit,
in order to prevent too great an increase in voltage across the field
in case of an accidental loose or open battery connection. With
the battery connected to the generator and all cable connections
making good contact, the current flowing through the armature
produces the necessary reaction and effects regulation holding down
the voltage to a normal value.
When the generator is disconnected from the battery for any
length of time, the reaction normally set up by the armature ap-

PRINTED PAGE 168
proaches a zero value, thereby causing a greatly increased e. m. f.
to be developed by armature conductors between the main and third
brush across which the field windings are connected. The net result
under these conditions is an increased field exciting current approach-
ing in value the normal output rating of the machine, and conse-
quently a greatly increased terminal voltage developed. As the
value of the current required for field excitation is quite small in
comparison with the generator output, the field windings would not
stand this overvoltage in case of an open battery connection for
any length of time, and a fuse of 8 to 12 ampere capacity is there-
fore connected in the field circuit to protect the winding. This fuse
is held in place by two phosphor-bronze clips, the entire assembly
being protected by a nickel-plated cover, as shown on Diagram 164.
It is not feasible to supply lamps directly from a constant current
generator with battery disconnected unless the lamps so connected
consume the entire current output of the machine. If the current
required to supply the lamps is less than the generator output the
lamps will be burned out. For instance, if the generator output
is 15 amperes and the current consumed by the lights is 7 amperes,
the generator voltage will rise until the additional 8 amperes not
required by the lamps will be forced through the lamp circuit. This
will naturally overload the lamps and burn them out. No attempt
should, therefore, be made to operate lamps direct from a constant
current generator without using a storage battery in conjunction
with them.
GENERATOR TEST
Start the engine, allow it to run at a speed sufficient to obtain a
generator r. p. m. of 1,000 or more and with a test ammeter con-
nected between the cable leading to generator and the terminal of
generator, observe the output. This output should not be less than
12 or more than 16 amperes.
Before making any adjustment, test the battery with a hydrometer
and carefully inspect the brushes to see that they are seated properly
on the commutator and that they are free to move up and down in
their respective holders. Also inspect the commutator to see that
it is clean and that the mica insulation between bars is properly
undercut, as high mica and dirt will prevent satisfactory operation
of generator.
If the specific gravity of the battery is 1.25 or above, and the
generator is delivering from 12 and 14 amperes at this speed, no
adjustment is necessary.
The arrangement of the brushes and cut-out switch in the front
head of the generator is shown on blue print 164 and all symbols used
in the following instructions will be found on this blue print.

PRINTED PAGE 169
ADJUSTING THE GENERATOR SWITCH OR CUT-OUT
First, see that the main switch or cut-out connects the generator
to the battery at the proper voltage. The speed of generator need
not be considered in making this check, but with a test voltmeter
connected across the two main brushes of machine measure the
voltage at the instant the test ammeter, already connected in circuit,
begins to show a charge. The correct voltage at which the main
switch closes is 6.5 volts, and if the voltage is above or below this
value switch should be adjusted by inserting a small fiber handle
socket wrench in the adjusting hole at “A” and turning the tension-
spring adjusting nut until the switch closes at the correct voltage.
ADJUSTING THE REGULATOR
The current output of the generator when driven at speeds of
1,400 to 1,600 r. p. m. should not be less than 12 or more than 15
amperes, and its output should be adjusted accordingly.
It is not necessary to remove the generator for adjusting. The
third or regulating brush is so arranged that by inserting a special
tooth-adjusting wrench (B–4 260–M) the adjusting hole at B and
engaging the ratchet (6) the entire regulating brush assembly can
be shifted in a direction required.
Before attempting to adjust, remove the cable from the generator
terminal and connect a standard test ammeter between the generator
and cable removed and note the value of current. If the current
delivered by the generator is less than 12 or more than 16 amperes,
then adjust.
Moving the regulating brush assembly in direction opposite to
the rotation of the generator’s armature decreases the current output
and in the same direction of armature rotation increases the output.
To get the best results, the setting should be made when the
generator is hot and connected to a battery having a specific gravity.
CARE AND MAINTENANCE
In order to maintain the following:
1. Lubricated bearings.
2. Clean brushes.
3. Clean commutator.
4. Free movement of the brushes in their holders.
5. Good contact of brushes with the commutator.
6. Brush springs bearing on brushes.
1. A few drops of thin neutral oil should be put into the oilers of
the generator after every two weeks. This will insure proper lubri-
cation of the bearings and prevent freezing to the armature shaft.

PRINTED PAGE 170
2. After the generator has been run for a length of time, carbon
dust will accumulate on the brushes and brush holders, which will
tend to destroy their useful functions. Wear on the brushes is
natural and the dust caused by same can not be avoided from col-
lecting on the parts inside the generator. It is possible for oil from
the bearings or other sources to reach the inside of the generator and
mix with the carbon dust, forming a gummy paste which readily
adheres to the brushes and holders. This paste can be removed by
washing the brushes in gasoline and removing from the brush holders
with a cloth soaked in gasoline.
3. The surface of the commutator should be free from oil and dirt.
To clean the commutator, run the engine at a moderate speed, and
with No. 00 sandpaper cut into thin strips remove any dirt or soil
that may have collected. Do not use emery cloth or cloth. Never
put lubricant of any kind on the commutator. After cleaning, be
sure that all the sand particles from the sandpaper have been blown
out of the machine.
4. The brushes, when replaced in their holders, should be free to
move up and down.
5. Seating of the brushes can quickly be accomplished by placing
a thin strip of No. 00 sandpaper under the brush with the sanded
side of the paper against the commutator bearing surface of the brush
and drawn from under brush against the rotation of the armature.
Pressure of the brush springs is sufficient to cause the sandpaper to
sear brushes and it is not necessary to apply extra pressure on the
tops of brushes with the fingers.
6. See that the brush springs are away from the head casting or
screws that would cause a ground, and that they bear upon tops of
brushes at the center. This will insure proper pressure exerted on
the brushes by the springs.

PRINTED PAGE 171
AMMUNITION AND ARMAMENT
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The ammunition storage capacity of the Mark VIII machine is
21,000 rounds of machine-gun ammunition and 208 rounds of 6-
pounder ammunition. Of the 208 rounds of 6-pounder ammunition,
26 rounds are smoke shells and the balance are common shells.
LOCATION OF 6-POUNDER SHELLS
There are five places for storing the 6-pounder ammunition, one in
each sponson, one on each side of the driver, and one in the center
of the fighting compartment. The top rows of 6-pounder shells in
the sponsons are smoke shells. These shells go into cylindrical cases,
designed to fit them, and from which they can be removed readily.
The capacity of each of the sponson magazines or ammunition stor-
age spaces are six smoke shells on each side of the sponson underneath
the gun and seven smoke shells at rear of sponson, giving 13 smoke
shells on each side, or 26 total.
There are 12 common shells in each sponson magazine. The mag-
azines on each side of the driver are capable of holding 49 shells.
These are common shells, giving a total of 98 for the two sides in
these magazines. The munition storage in the center of the fighting
compartment is capable of taking 30 shells on each side, giving a
total of 60 in the center.
MACHINE-GUN AMMUNITION
The machine-gun ammunition is distributed between the ammuni-
tion storage space in the center and on the bulkhead between the
engine room and the fighting compartment. The number of racks
contained in the center consists of 21 on the starboard side and 17
on the port side. In the bulkhead between the engine room and the
fighting compartment there are four ammunition racks.

PRINTED PAGE 172
SPARE MACHINE-GUN BARRELS
Seven spare machine-gun barrels are carried, one being mounted
in each sponson just forward of the 6-pounder shield. Two are
located in each sponson, forward of the side doors. The machine
guns are dismounted, and carried inside the Mark VIII machine, and
are stored in the following clips for use: One on each sponson, just
forward of the 6-pounder shield; two on each sponson on the rear
plate of same, and one on the port side just forward of the door.
SMOKE BOMBS
Two British .303 service rifles are stored, one on each side just aft of
the doors and forward of the engine-compartment bulkhead, held by
clips. Stored with these rifles are two smoke-bomb cups to be
fitted to the ends of the rifles, and 80 rounds of .303 special rifle
ammunition for the smoke bombs. There are also 44 rifle smoke
bombs stored in a box under the port door.

PRINTED PAGE 173
HOTCHKISS SPARE PARTS
There are two boxes of Hotchkiss spare parts, tools, and appurte-
nances, and each box contains the following:
1 fore-sight cover.
1 ejector.
1 extractor.
2 firing pins.
2 locking screws.
2 fore sights.
1 cartridge stop spring.
1 ejector spring.
2 feed springs (No. 2).
1 recoil spring.
2 sear springs.
1 cleaning brush.
1 cylinder cleaner.
2 hand extractors.
1 ejector key.
1 bore-cleaning rod.
2 dismounting wrenches.
1 pin box for small parts M. G.
1 oil can.
1 hammer M. G.
1 No. 3 M. G. punch.
1 mirror reflector M. G.
1 large screw driver M. G.
2 double pull throughs .303.
4 pieces gauze wire, pull throughs.

PRINTED PAGE 174
SIX-POUNDER PARTS
The trays containing the 6-pounder spare parts are placed on the
floor of the sponson just in the rear of the platform, one tray in each
sponson. These boxes contain the following:
1 spare telescope (in leather case).
1 cleaning cloth for lenses.
1 cleaning rod and sponge brush.
1 spare sponge brush.
One set of spare parts and tools consisting of the following to be
carried in two trays, one behind each gun:
1 spanner and screw driver, combined No. 143.
2 screw drivers.
1 oil can.
1 crank, complete.
1 crank roller.
2 extractors.
2 hand extractors.
2 firing hammers, complete.
4 firing pins, complete, with strikers.
1 rocking shaft.
2 trigger sears.
4 main springs.
4 trigger-retaining springs.
2 trigger sear springs.
1 tommy.
LOCATION OF 6-POUNDER GUNS
The two 6-pounder guns are carried, one in each sponson. These
guns swing with the sponson, and have an angle of fire from 5° right
of the longitudinal line to 5° aft of the transverse line, or, in other
words, in a 90° arc, moving 5° back from true longitudinal transverse.
The 6-pounder guns can be pulled back within the sponson so that
when the sponsons are swung inboard the guns can be withdrawn
sufficiently to allow the machine to be carried on the railway.
TO WITHDRAW THE 6-POUNDER GUNS
To pull back the 6-pounder guns for railway shipment, first unscrew
the bolts fastening the sponson to the main hull, and push the sponson
inboard from the outside as per directions on page 175. Unscrew the
12 bolts fastening the gun pivot plate, and the four screws fastening
the training stops to the gun pedestal base plate. Draw the gun,
pivot plate, and shield back as far as desired, and securely fasten to
prevent sliding.

PRINTED PAGE 175
TO REMOVE AND REPLACE THE 6-POUNDER GUNS
In removing and replacing the 6-pounder guns, remove the “above
platform shell store” to give more room to work. Unscrew the 12
bolts fastening the gun pivot plate and the four screws fastening the
training stops to the gun pedestal base plate. Move the gun and
shield back into the fighting compartment. Remove the shield by
unscrewing the six bolts holding it to the gun mount. The gun and
shield can then be removed separately through the side door. To
replace the gun, put the shield in through one of the side doors, and
then the gun and mounting. Bolt the two together, and place on
top of the gun pedestal base plate and bolt into position.
LOCATION OF MACHINE GUNS
There are seven Hotchkiss machine guns on the Mark VIII
machine, five of these being in the main turret, one front, one rear,
two on each side, and one located in each of the side doors, in the
hull of the machine.
TO MOUNT MACHINE GUN
To mount the Hotchkiss machine gun in any of the machine
gun posts in the Mark VIII machine, the machine gun is placed in
the mount and pushed forward until the mounting shoulder falls
into the recesses. The gun is then pushed forward and down. This
pushes the locking lug back and the gun falls into place, being held
by the locking lugs.
To remove the machine gun, push forward and up, or turn upside
down so weight will help, which pushes the locking lugs in and releases
the shoulder. The gun can then be removed.

PRINTED PAGE 176
DESCRIPTION OF VENTILATING SYSTEM
The air for ventilating the fighting compartment is drawn in through
the inlet louver, above the engine, by means of a suction fan, driven
from the crank shaft. The fan is a 7½-inch unit, driven by a link
belt at crank-shaft speed.
The intake is drawn in through the front louver, and the air passes
out through the duct to the fan, and thence through a discharge duct
into the fighting compartment, through an opening beneath the
starboard passageway. The fan is located under the side of the engine
on the starboard side, just in the rear of the bulkhead, between the
fighting compartment and the engine room. It is fastened to the
floor by two angle irons.
CAPACITY OF FAN
The fan has a capacity of 900 cubic feet per minute at 1.400 r. p. m.,
against a pressure of 2 inches.
FAN DRIVE
The fan is driven by means of a link belt, ⅝ inch wide and ½ inch
pitch. The diameters of the fan-driving sprockets are 5.101 inches,
and there are 32 teeth on each, giving a 1 to 1 ratio, or, in other
words, driving the fan at crank-shaft speed.
INLET LOUVER
The inlet louver is located in the rear of the towing post, the
forward end being just where the rear end of the Mark VIII machine
slopes downward. It is over the forward end of the engine compart-
ment.
The inlet louver is made up of 34 armor-plate blades, angle-shaped,
forming a 90° angle 16 mm. thick. Each of these plates is separated
from the next one by a distance piece, and there are 122 of these
distance pieces to the inlet louver. The total dimensions of the

PRINTED PAGE 177
louver opening are 3 feet 1¼ inches in width, and 2 feet 1.825 inches
in length. The length and size of the louver opening are 6 feet
8¾ inches high, with a 2⅞-inch flange at the bottom and a ¾-inch
flange at the top, these plates being made of 5/16-inch material.
UNDITCHING DEVICE
The unditching device consists of two 12 by 12 skew logs, carried
on the guards at the rear of the machine until they are required.
When the machine is ditched the rods are chained to the tracks so
that they move with the tracks. At the rear end of the turret the
rods strike an angle plate, set so as to carry them by the turret at an
angle. As they fall over the front of the machine they straighten
themselves and lie under the track, giving additional traction to the
machine, allowing it to go ahead. The logs are carried by the track
back to their original position, and if the machine has become
unditched they can be unjoined and stored in place.
EQUIPMENT OF MACHINE
The following list of equipment is tentative, and in the final edition
of this handbook will probably be corrected. At the time of going
to press with the preliminary edition the following items are to be
carried by each Mark VIII machine. The parts marked “E.” are
supplied by England and the parts marked “A.” are supplied by
America:
EQUIPMENT CARRIED ON MARK VIII MACHINE
(E. Supplied by England. A. Supplied by America.)
(As approved by the Tank Committee and the Anglo-American
Commission, March 7, 1918.)
I. Guns:
6-pounder (E.)—
26-pounder Q. F. Hotchkiss 23-caliber.
2 recoil mountings casement, Mark II.
2 sighting telescopes 15, Mark I.
1 spare telescope (in leather case).
1 cleaning cloth for lenses.
1 cleaning rod and sponge brush.
1 spare sponge brush.
1 set spare parts and tools consisting of the following (to be
carried in two trays, one behind each gun):
1 spanner and screw driver combined, No. 143.
2 screw drivers.
1 oil can.
1 crank, complete.
1 crank roller.
2 extractors.
2 hand extractors.
2 firing hammers, complete.

PRINTED PAGE 179
I. Guns—Continued.
6-pounder (E.)—Continued.
4 firing pins, complete with strikers.
1 rocking shaft.
2 trigger sears.
4 main springs.
4 trigger-retaining springs.
2 trigger sear springs.
1 tommy.
Machine guns (E.)—
7 Hotchkiss .303-inch machine guns.
7 spare barrels.
7 tripod mountings.
7 shackles for tripod mountings.
7 shoulder pieces.
7 cradles for 50-round ammunition belts.
7 cartridge-case deflectors, Marks I or II.
7 deflector bags.
44 ammunition boxes (each box to hold six 50-round belts).
264 50-round ammunition belts.
2 boxes Hotchkiss spare parts, tools, and appurtenances
(each box containing the following) :
Machine—
1 fore-sight cover.
1 ejector.
1 extractor.
2 firing pins.
2 locking screws.
2 fore sights.
1 cartridge-stop spring.
1 ejector spring.
2 feed springs (No. 2).
1 recoil spring.
2 sear springs.
1 cleaning brush.
1 cylinder cleaner.
2 hand extractors.
1 ejector key.
1 bore-cleaning rod.
2 dismounting wrenches.
1 pin box for small parts, M. G.
1 oil can.
1 hammer, M. G.
1 No. 3 M. G. punch.
1 mirror reflector, M. G.

PRINTED PAGE 180
I. Guns—Continued.
Machine—Continued.
1 large screw driver, M. G.
2 double-pull throughs, .303.
4 pieces gauze wire-pull throughs.
Smoke-bomb rifles (E.)—
2 service rifles, .303.
2 smoke-bomb cups (fitted to end of barrel).
II. Ammunition (E.):
184 rounds of Q. F., 6-pounder.
24 rounds of Q. F., 6-pounder case shot.
13,200 rounds .303 M. G.
80 rounds .303 special rifle for smoke bombs.
44 rifle smoke bombs (to be stored in box below port door).
III. Fittings:
Internal—
(E.) 1 signaling semaphore.
(A.) 1 medical and surgical equip (carried in canvas bag and
stored in bulkhead).
(E.) 1 yardometer and odometer calibrated to read in yards.
(E.) 1 compass (Aerial No. 259A, with electric bulb for night-
work). 6 periscopes.
(A.) 8 Pyrene fire extinguishers (3 on each door and 2 in engine
room).
(E.) 2 map boards (1 for commander and 1 for driver).
1 pigeon basket (to hold two birds).
1 broom.
2 electric torches.
1 Hellesen hand light.
1 inspection lamp (fitted with extension cord and plug).
1 hot-food container.
1 camp kettle.
2 canvas buckets.
1 signal gong (to be operated from outside tank).
1 speaking tube system.
4 2-gallon drinking-water cans (stored 2 above each door).
1 ration box (under starboard door and built into tank).
1 officer’s locker (observation pedestal) to have folding door
and lock).
External—
1 tarpaulin cover.
1 camouflage net (to be held up by detachable posts on hull).
1 unditching gear (two skew logs to be stored on sponson if
carried).
1 towing cable, 30 feet (60 tons’ strength).
