In the references/ directory, we have collected and cleaned up (as best we can)
the primary sources we have been able to identify concerning the Mark VIII
tank.  There is a wealth of information, since two of the documents are what
are believed to be the primary original official working manual and standard
parts list for the tank in question,  but in the form found in those manuals
it is only the starting point inputs for producing a detailed CAD model.

To prepare for actual geometry creation and organization, we need to:

1.  Survey the documents and build up a canonical parts database - both the SNL
and the handbook have this type of information, and there may be relevant part
information to be found in others, so we must organize it and identify every
physical component that will need geometric expression.  The database should
also track the source for each part's information as well as its relevant
data (part numbers, sizing info, etc.)  I recommend the first pass be used to
identify requirements and design a database schema that will hold the
information we need to save, and then a second pass to populate it.  Ambiguous
cases where information is contradictory should be noted, with resolutions when
context allows for a high confidence deduction.

2.  Once we have the parts database, we need to access what additional
information we need to try and seek out to be able to produce geometric models.
If standard commercial parts are called out, it may be fruitful to see if there
are online digitized original documents from the relevant vendors we could
source more detailed part information or even visuals from.  If we are unable
to do that, then we must fall back on information available in publication
figures combined with more general design principles (sheets of metal, types of
screws, etc. are standard industrial components in many cases and we should be
able to produce reasonable representations even without vendor specifics by
bearing in mind the application, time and place - but the more specific we can
be, the better.  The output of this step should be a summary report of what we
are fully confident of being able to describe, any available primary source
information candidates that may warrant the same cleanup-and-archiving
treatment given to the primary sources, what can be expressed with reasonable
confidence based on general engineering principles of 1920s construction of
this type, and parts where we lack sufficient information to represent them.
Once we have this overview, we can consider our next steps.
